Christmas trees
I think in those hard times I was very resourceful and I tried somehow to keep that “home” going, and for every holiday there was a Christmas tree. One Christmas under the German occupation there was an announcement that under no circumstances was one allowed to have a Christmas tree, and it was considered a horror to bring one oneself from the forest. Two stubborn creatures, Gena Mojkowa and Gena Duda, went to the nearest German estate. In the park fence they found a hole and cut down two beautiful Christmas trees in the park. It was already late at night when each of us brought the children a tree. A great joy for us was the underground press. Often those little papers were barely holding together at the folds; after reading, we passed them on to a neighbor—naturally only to a Polish woman. We used to copy out various prophecies and they heartened us very much—“hope is the mother of fools”. We still have them—if I manage, I will copy them out for the children. Oh, how we awaited the end of the war. My dearest daydreams were of greeting Polish soldiers in my thoughts, and deep down I was sure of it, and from the start I regarded the marching Germans as defeated.
Somehow I managed to get in touch with Nusia, who was then in Zmigrodzie. She was doing a whole heaven better than we were, but she couldn’t really help us much because from the General Government one could send packages of barely 25 dkg. Nusia sent me something like twice a small parcel with new stockings. Naturally I sold them at once, and with that money I bought a small iron stove with one “burner”; it helped us a great deal, because I set it up in the room and so it warmed us and at the same time I could cook on it. I almost forgot to write about one important thing. They gave us from the Muzeum Słowackiego for safekeeping the manuscript of Balladyna. Słowacki’s handwriting was like pearls—regular, clear, on splendid paper. Besides that there were also poems there, such as “Smutno mi Boże,” which Słowacki illustrated in pen. You could see he was an artist in every sense of the word. I didn’t know where to keep that treasure. Among the books I was afraid that in the event of a search they would find the manuscript, and yet by hiding it under the mattresses I was exposing it just the same. I wrapped it in linen cloth and from time to time looked through it. The only thing the Germans did not liquidate was the Muzeum Słowackiego located in the manor where Słowacki was born. (At present the Soviet authorities have made a library in that little house, and the exhibits in the form of furniture they have stored in the attic over the general museum. In that museum there is only a small room with two display cases in which there are some mementos of Słowacki). The curator under the Germans was Dr. Kryński; he was disabled but a very educated man, and he had a young and pretty wife. I was in that museum a few times and I liked it immensely there: quiet, perfect order. Apple trees grew by the house; we used to get apples from them. We were in Krzemieniec three years ago and saw everything. You can clearly see they are destroying all mementos and traces of Polishness. Since I am already on cultural matters, I must also mention the fate of the enormous library that was at the Liceum im. T. Czackiego. It held all the new publications and, in addition, the so‑called black and white ravens of our literature [rarities]. When the Bolsheviks entered Krzemieniec—Tulu was working at the Museum (he was head of the natural history department), so he had access to the Lyceum buildings—he came one time and, as one says, almost cried to me, because he had seen the Bolsheviks light a bonfire in the courtyard and burn and tear beautiful books. Tulu secretly brought out some books, but when we fled Krzemieniec it was all lost. One fellow (I didn’t remember his surname) rescued Słowacki’s manuscript and managed to get to Warsaw. All trace of the manuscript was lost. If it had stayed with us it would have survived.
More about the Museum. Before the war Tulu practically devoted his life to collecting (and he still does now). As a little boy he started with matchboxes. Then he collected books, chemicals, plants, and insects (now stamps, newspapers, and of course books). He collected insects with great expertise and passion. A carpenter made him display cases at our expense. The antennae and legs were set to tenths of a millimeter; larger insects were mounted, and caterpillars, for example, were inflated. At night we both hunted moths. Every walk was combined either with catching insects or gathering plants. Even little Lila would notice insects, which she called “eku.” Sometimes I looked askance at it, because money was tight and the cases cost a lot. There were 32 display cases. At the outbreak of the war Tulu consolidated those cases at home. One room was completely hung with them. In each case there was a vial with a moth‑killing agent. The cases are very airtight. When we fled Krzemieniec, Tulu gave those cases to the Museum “for safekeeping,” and so they have remained to this day. When we were with Tulu three years ago, we saw them—they are beautifully preserved. Tulu now intended to open them, but I advised him against it for fear that precisely after opening, bacteria would get in and destroy the insects. These are priceless collections. The only consolation in this is that the current staff treated Tulu with great respect and spoke of organizing a large exhibition of insects with Tulu’s portrait. Besides those cases, there are also in the museum plants collected by Tulu—about two thousand. The current staff write to us and have been asking Tulu who was the founder of the Museum—naturally the one murdered by the Germans, Prof. Mączak, and not Mr Cynkałowski, who claims to be the founder.
I cried my eyes out during our stay in Krzemieniec. I like Krzemieniec very much. Two of our children were born there; Babcia’s grave is there. Lili was born in Żółkiew, which is now renamed “Niesterow.” Everyone there welcomed us like guests; even Mrs Turkowa, a fierce Ukrainian, gave us a jar of honey—but what of it when everyone is waiting for the Germans. For me all this gave the impression as if I were living in a grave. At moments it seemed to me I could smell corpses. And everywhere dirty, ugly. Our relatives live in old, musty houses. Old Brody is one ruin—roads rutted, holes, mud, dust. Trees cut down. Of Babcia’s little house not a trace. In general people there build very little, and those new buildings are such contrived little houses, without fences. Shops dirty, wretched. People very badly dressed. Women neglected, obese. Trees cut down. Kremieniec is, outwardly, relatively little damaged and clean, for which it owes the academic congresses. Cemeteries overgrown—drowning in nettles, plaques torn off Polish graves. There are no Greek Catholic churches; there are only Orthodox churches, and only old women go to them. Working people and the young are not allowed to go to church. The Catholic church in Brody has been turned into a school of physical education. The Lyceum church in Krzemieniec is boarded up with planks. The parish Catholic church is open once a month. The monastery in Podkamień has been turned into a home for the insane. In Podkamień, beautiful statues of saints lie smashed along the roads. Buses dirty, rickety. Eateries disgusting. In the shops anything of value can be obtained only with a bribe. I didn’t believe Tulu when he told me about grain drying on the roads, until I saw it with my own eyes. Everyone drinks vodka. Divorces are an everyday occurrence. I know the present government in those lands doesn’t care, but if the Ukrainians were more cultured it wouldn’t be like this. I don’t want to go there anymore. Tulu is drawn there, but let him go alone.
Our escape from Krzemieniec.
On the “farm” we left Unold’s Maria. She too soon fled after us, and the farm was taken over by Gena Majkowa. What happened to the furniture—I don’t know, and there was quite a lot of it, because three rooms were furnished. Part of the bedding, dishes, and books we loaded into chests and trunks and left with neighbors “for safekeeping.” We had to flee—a black mass of Ukrainians around Krzemieniec. In Krzemieniec, rampaging Germans. Tula’s Polish coworkers were being hunted down by the Germans one by one. Any day now Tulu might not come home from the museum. The children had long been asking me for a kitten. Downstairs in the basement lived a woman. Her cat had lovely kittens. I got one—a beautiful gray. We named him Szaruś. The children didn’t want to leave the kitten in Krzemieniec and took him with them. Everyone later talked about the cat fleeing with us. Beforehand we gathered information and addresses needed for the escape. We had very little cash, because the Ukrainians didn’t want to buy—they knew anyway that we wouldn’t be taking our belongings with us; besides, those hyenas had enough off the Jews. We took with us the remnants of our clothes, some bedding. Tulu took along a lot of his gear, like a microscope, some special mirror, tweezers, etc. Now Tulu says he shouldn’t have taken it, but then it was hard for him to part with it. The most important things were documents and photographs. I took the kettle my mother bought me when I went to my post, and which still serves us to this day. We hired a cart and loaded our “property.” The children also got on it with the kitten and a toy monkey; we with Tulu went on foot into the unknown, terrifying. We did not receive a permit to leave, but at the railway station we got on the train without tickets. In the same compartment sat some Germans, but they pretended not to see us. That’s how we reached Dubno. We hauled out our things and set up camp in the waiting room. Supposedly some railwayman there was to seat us in a train bound for Brody, where Aldku—Tulu’s brother, then working on the railroad—was waiting for us, but there one train after another departed and we sat at the station. Tulu fainted. When I revived him, after talking it over, Tulu went to the railwaymen and showed them a gold five-ruble coin—it helped. They shoved us into a train, but what of it when at Radziwiłłów they ordered us to get off. It was the border station between the so-called Ukraine and the General Government. The next station was already Brody, and in it Aldku. The station was empty and we alone with a mountain of bundles and the children in the middle. A Polish railwayman came up to us and advised us to leave the platform quickly, because when the shift came on—and they were Ukrainians—we would be done for. We dragged our bundles and the children as best we could to the nearest house. We were lucky, because it was the house of a Polish railwayman. He installed us in a room from which, that very day, they had carried the body to the cemetery of that railwayman’s son, murdered by Ukrainians. Well into the afternoon a railwayman from Brody arrived, who took Lila and Otuś into a freight train to a signalman’s hut. He locked them in and I was terribly afraid of that separation. The children arrived safely; Aldku took them, who supposedly cried when he saw them. We were left alone with Ania in Radziwiłłów, because our hosts were not there. Suddenly, toward evening, we heard shooting, very close. We lay down on the floor under the windows and waited. Suddenly someone began bellowing at the windows; we were terribly frightened, thinking they were bandits, until we heard a voice: “Mr Duda—please open up.” That young, tall railwayman had come especially for us. He snatched Ania up in his arms and we took only the suitcase with documents and photographs and rushed after him to the locomotive waiting for us. On the tracks a German stopped us for a moment, but that railwayman replied energetically that he was rescuing us from bandits, and so we reached the engine. They had come for us on purpose; supposedly that railwayman ferried many families into the General Government for evacuation and himself was killed. We got off at night before the station and went to the agreed house to sleep. In the morning we went to Aldeks, where Lila and Oluś were already waiting for us. Supposedly safe, yet poor, homeless, helpless. All our belongings remained in Radziwiłłów, and only later, when that railwayman moved to Brody, did he bring over our “treasures” too. We obtained, for a fee, fake Kennkarten (equivalents of identity cards), and we waited for Nusia, who was to come for us from Zmigrod. When Nusia saw us, she was disappointed, because she thought that after all a professor’s family would be coming, and there we were with Tulu, thin, darkened, dressed in “God help us” rags, and three scrawny children. We walked for the last time in the garden at old Brody, slept under Tula’s family roof. In that little house, during the holidays, Otuś was christened. To that little house I used to come in my maiden days and then as a married woman; in that little house Lila stayed for a time under Babcia’s care. In that little house Ania was for the first and last time. We ate fruit from the trees Tulu had planted. The cottage was charming. It had a little porch overgrown with vines, an entry hall from which one entered a room and the kitchen on the right side, and on the left there were two little rooms, those cubicles separated by a thin wall not reaching the ceiling. Wooden floors, clean and yellow, white walls. In the garden lilacs, acacias, ash trees, fruit trees, and many flowers. We had to say goodbye to the Aldeks (they then had three sons), to the cottage, and go farther—to Zmigrod near Jasło. The road was awful. In Lwów, in Podzamcze, we waited a long time and into the train drifted the stench of burning bodies. In the train, incredible crush; the children stood the whole time on the benches behind people’s backs. In their arms they held the kitten, which struggled to get free. With difficulty we reached Jasło, and from there by some truck to Zmigrod. Auntie’s little flat, clean, cozy, peaceful, but unfortunately Julek—Nusia’s husband—was already then ill with tuberculosis. Tuberculosis had already taken over his whole body; he could no longer walk, for his legs were diseased too. With Nusia there then stayed Julek’s sister, Zosia Mrożkowa—the mother of the later well-known writer Mrożek. I remember that for supper there were potato dumplings. I don’t remember after how many days, probably the very next day, we moved into “our own.” It was a single room in a former Jewish house. Besides us, two more families lived there: the Przewłockis and the Brożyns. They had two-room flats. Mrs Przewłocka worked at the dairy. Przewłocki wrote poems. The Brożyns had a little daughter, Halinka, and the Przewłockis a small foster girl, Janeczka, sickly and very improperly dressed and brought up; during the front that child died. Tulu also worked at the dairy, and then it was a food paradise. There was lots of milk; we got cream and butter, there was bread and even meat. Nusia gave us some materials from which I sewed coats for Ania and Lila; I even refashioned clothes for Otuś and even for Kazik Unold (he was with us too) out of old garments. I also sewed myself as many as two dresses. In a word, paradise compared with Krzemieniec. I remember my first trip to the seamstress, who lived outside Zmigrod. I had to force myself to take that walk, because in Krzemieniec it was impossible because of the Ukrainian bands. Just before the escape from Krzemieniec we slept with axes under the beds so that in case of an attack we could defend ourselves. Not far from us they had already murdered our acquaintance, Górecki. Our “furniture” in Zmigrod was mostly from sawmill offcuts, nailed together by Tulu. There were two “couches” and a cabinet made of boards, and Nusia lent us one iron bed, a table, a small cabinet, and a few chairs. It was not much bigger, or perhaps the same size, as our present room. One couch was carried into the entryway by day. Kazik U. slept on it. He was supposed to be at Nusia’s, but I took him to us, because the sick Jurek had to have peace and Kazek was terribly talkative; secondly, I didn’t want a starved, emaciated boy to be in contact with a consumptive. On the shelves, as usual where Tulu is, there already lay neat stacks of newspapers. We used a lamp for light. In the evenings we sat at the table; the cat strolled under our chins [possibly: around our laps] or over our shoulders. As usual, I did not idle; I often cooked dinners at Nusia’s, helped her wash and clean; at our place too the floor had to be scrubbed, cooking done, etc. I taught Bogna and Otuś, and Lila even had a few piano lessons and went to school. I also went to Jasło with butter for the Germans; on that occasion I always took something to trade, most often veal, cream, butter (it was Nusia’s goods), but for us too I took enough that with that goods the dentist repaired my and Lila’s teeth. These were dangerous trips, because often at the entrance to Jasło the Germans searched us. For this purpose I took Lila and hid the goods under the seat; in the back there were crates of butter for the warehouse. Nusia always waited for our return in fear. Tulu often took the children for walks—they gathered ćereń [possibly chokecherries/sloes], from which I made an excellent syrup. Otuś fell ill again with pneumonia, but as always he came through it safely. The torment was Julek’s illness. Nusia, as they say, “stood on her head” to save him, but the inexorable tuberculosis consumed him. He was a very handsome fellow; he was a teacher, but even before the war Father drew him into the dairy (it was theirs). When the war broke out, Nusia with Julek took over the facility in Zmigrod, and Julek’s parents remained in Bożęcin. Kazik U. was in Zmigrod until First Communion, and he was the same age as Lila. That idyll did not last long—the front was approaching from the east. The Germans had fits of fury. The Home Army (AK) had its hands full. Almost the entire Żmigród intelligentsia belonged to the AK. By day they worked; at night they went on actions, and already the Germans were ordering trenches to be dug. I, on account of the small children, was exempted from this. Tulu, as a dairy worker, too. Some traitor betrayed the AK men. The Gestapo staged a raid on them. The front was already near—a “theater” was coming to Zmigrod; the “actresses” stayed in private homes. One of them stayed with the Brożyns, who belonged to the AK. As a precaution he cut out a little space under the floor to hide in in case of a search. The night was sultry; we slept with the window open. Suddenly I hear: “Das Fenster zumachen, aber schnell.” I closed the window and the Gestapo were already pounding on the entry door. Przewłocki opened for them, and the Germans went straight to us. They shone flashlights, saw Tula in bed, and said, “Gut, gut, der Mann ist zu Hause,” and pulled out a list of the condemned. They asked for Tula’s surname, which, however, did not appear on their list. They searched anyway and told Tulu to get dressed and took him to the Brożyns. Hearing the commotion at our place and in the entry, Brożyna instantly jumped into the little pit that was in the corner of the kitchen. In that spot stood a table covered with a cloth. The Germans slapped the “actress” in the face for not keeping an eye on Brożyna—they were simply raging. They ordered Tulu and Przewłocki to shift a pile of coal in the cellar. They jabbed with bayonets every bundle of straw in the attic. Brożyna vanished, and the house had been under observation since dusk. They took Tula and Przewłocki and ordered them to lead the way to the indicated addresses. Tula knew whom it was about, but he luckily wriggled out of it, saying he was a stranger, that he knew no one, and he led them to a house that wasn’t on the list. They beat Tula and ordered him to go home. Tula came drenched in sweat, because until the last moment he was sure they would kill him. My reaction was an unending scream. The Germans lunged at me and hushed me like a witch—and I surely looked like one, because I was in a black slip and had disheveled hair. The next day they told me that with that screaming I had alarmed the neighboring houses and the suspects had run away. When they took Tula, I was already sure I would never see him again. The Germans took Brożynowa, and said that if her husband did not report by morning, they would kill her. Tula and Przewłocki were gone—I was left alone with the children and little Halinka Brożynówna. The Germans told us to leave the light on and every moment burst into the house together with the “actress.” Little Halinka had a cradle fastened to the floor—I had to sit by her and rock her. After some time I heard from the little pit in the kitchen Brożyna’s voice, asking me to hand over his clothes, because he was only in his shirt. Brożyna’s clothes lay in the kitchen, but I handed him another from the wardrobe. Toward dawn Tulu came—an enormous relief. I told him about Brożyna. In the morning the lamenting family burst in and took Halinka, but I told them nothing about Brożyna. Only when the guard moved away from the house did I pass him breakfast under the table and some cigarettes, and Brożyna fled through the gardens into the forest. Brożynowa and several other hostages were assigned to the front, to the kitchen—after a time they began to badger [to plead with] the soldiers, and so all of them returned home. Then there was the attempt on Hitler. German troops were marching through Zmigrod—I stood in the doorway, and the soldiers waved their hands to me and shouted, “Matka! das Krüg ist cu ende.” Unfortunately for us, it was only then that the “Krüg” began. During that raid they took several people from Zmigrod and shot them. The front was approaching—when the houses began to shake from explosions, then we did the greatest stupidity with Nusia. We took the most valuable things, the sick Julek, and the children, and went to Kąty (closer to the Dukla Pass), right on the Wisłoka, in the hope that the front would bypass us, and there it was exactly the opposite.
Kąty
We arrived in Kąty on a beautiful September day. Sun, fruit on the trees. We set up a "camp" at a farmer friend’s—Wokurka’s—in a new house under the hill. Aunt Nusia drove us there and turned back to Zmigrod to save and secure the property. Meanwhile the front closed in at once and took Kąty into its range. Some inhabitants took refuge in the forests with their cattle, some in vaulted cellars. We spread kilims on the floor and lay down “like pancakes” on them: sick Julek, his six-year-old daughter Bogna, Tulu, I, Lila, Otuś, and Ania. Our hosts fled to the forest. The house trembles from exploding bullets, plaster falls from the walls and covers us with dust, the room is white with it. Out of the blue the first Soviet soldier enters the house, opens a window, sets up a machine gun in it, and fires. I begged him to leave this house because there are children and a seriously ill man here. It did no good. He advised us to leave the house, but how, Julek was on crutches, little children, and out in the open bullets were whistling thickly. Where to go?! The forest is too far, and we don’t know how far to any cellar. (The cellars were separate, almost completely dug into the ground, only the round roofs stuck up above the earth.) With a heavy heart we leave Julek behind (at his insistent requests), the children put on their little coats, we grab only a suitcase with documents and, literally between bullets, we sneak and run, wanting to reach some cellar. We must have come upon a large one [we duże: perhaps a large cellar], and no one took us in. Under the little roof of one cellar stood a peasant who magnanimously advised us to hide by the root cavity of trees by the Wisłoka. Indeed there are tall trees along the Wisłoka; we run down the steep bank and nestle into a hollow under the roots. Above us, the Bolsheviks; on the opposite bank of the Wisłoka, the Germans. A battle! Bullets plop right at our feet as they fall into the water. At one point a German figure with rifle ready to fire emerges from beyond the corner of a house on the other side of the Wisłoka. I went numb, because he was aiming in our direction. Perhaps he realized we were civilians with children—we stayed alive. We sat under that root cavity almost until dusk. In the meantime Tulu “visited” Julek twice. Although the house had no window panes left, Julek survived. Toward evening we got into acquaintances’ cellar. It was tiny; along one wall stood chests with the hosts’ clothing and linens. We lined the free half with kilims. Two-thirds of the little cellar was a single bed on which sometimes 13–14 people slept side by side. Except for the small children, no one could straighten their legs. Poor, tall, sick Julek! The little cellar, especially at night, shook to its foundations; heavy tanks drove right past the door. If a shell had hit the roof, we would all have been buried. In the morning it was quieter. Then we would leave the little cellar. Nusia and I combed and washed the children. We cooked in the cottage, and, on the sly and in haste, we peeled potatoes and even ground grain on quernstones. We had fat in the form of rendered butter. Just before the offensive I bought a little piglet; of course it stayed in Zmigrod, but our acquaintance Jan Nowak (now a judge) killed it and brought us half to Kąty. We cooked “ein Topf,” and only Julek ate separately; the rest from one pot. Kąty fell back into German hands. Corpses of soldiers were strewn all over the village. Tulu had to bury them. In the neighboring house there was the so-called “Szreibsztuba.” The Germans drove any civilians they caught to build a bridge that Soviet planes were bombing. Tulu was driven there several times. The Germans caught chickens all over Kąty and made me and Nusia pluck them. One time I started cursing, calling the Germans Szwaby and so on. One of them, who was dozing, leaning against the kitchen table, understood Polish; he sprang at me with a revolver—I bolted for the cellar—the German after me, and only when Tulu blocked his way and began to excuse me did it help, for the German waved it off and left. Among the Germans milling about there were also cultured ones, even with a heart. Am I overdoing it with that “heart”? But the fact is—the same German almost every day would pick Ania up, carry her to the supply truck, and load her up with either sugar or some canned goods. The front dragged on; to us it felt like ages. We decided to get out of Kąty. But how? The point from which one could leave the front by army vehicle was far, especially for sick, limping Julek, and then there were the little children and some odds and ends. Nusia learned that the German on whom our fate depended was celebrating his imieniny or birthday. She gathered some autumn flowers from neighboring gardens and went to offer good wishes. She returned with a promise that they would get us out of Kąty, only that we had to reach the point on our own. On foot was impossible because Julek was lame, small children, baggage. Any means of transport depended on the head of the “Szreibsztube.” It fell to me to procure that wagon. I went to the German and he started making advances—fortunately a front-line soldier came to report, and that saved me. We got the wagon. We loaded it with our belongings, seated sick Julek and little Ania on it; Lila, Oluś, and Bogna clung to the back of the wagon and rode standing. We had not gone far when the Soviets began raking the road with a hurricane of fire. It was hell. We snatched up Ania, helped Julek down in a flash, and took refuge in the nearest cellar. Meanwhile our carter whipped the horses on with our belongings to the vehicles’ departure point. Again, a terrible problem—how to get there with sick Julek and little children. Not far away there was an improvised first-aid post. Nusia and I went there. The head doctor was furious, living essentially on black coffee and cigarettes because he was performing amputations on wounded Germans without a break. Somehow we persuaded someone from the auxiliary staff and they gave us an ambulance, in which Julek arrived. The children and we went on foot. Our things were piled in an empty barn—another attack. Lila and Otuś were in the barn then, and its roof tiles were showering onto the yard. Naturally we came through that as well. But, to sink us completely, a pelting rain set in; mud up to our ankles, and through that mud we carried our odds and ends to the truck waiting for us. When the children scrambled under the truck’s tarp, a puddle literally formed around each of them. Not one of the children, nor even we, so much as sneezed. At last we drove beyond the front line—it felt almost silly in that silence. They took us, late at night, to some locality, and we found ourselves in an empty room with straw and hay on the floor. The Germans who were sitting in rooms farther in gave us hot black coffee, and we lay down to sleep side by side. In the morning we set off again. The driver was a bit tipsy and wanted to deliver us right to the house in Turza near Gorlice. In that house lived Julek’s brother, a teacher in Turza. Just before the destination this ride nearly ended in tragedy. The road was slippery, clayey, climbing uphill; on the left and right a steep drop, the so-called “paryje.” The truck was right on the edge of the precipice when Ania let out a terrible scream and the unfortunate driver cut the engine. We got out carefully so the truck wouldn’t tip over, and partly on foot, partly on the wagon brought by Kazik Kędzior, we reached our destination. Nusia, with Julek and Bogna, moved into a tiny room at Kazik’s, and we stayed nearby with a widow.
Stay in Turza.
Aunt Nusia did what she could to get food and nursed her sick husband. We were healthy, but each day was very hard to get through. I bartered leftover rags for food, I went to dig potatoes, Tulu went to the forest for fuel. Digging was hard work for me. The peasants gathered and took turns doing the digging. Compared to me they were well-fed and strong, and I wanted to acquit myself with honor and kept up with them as best I could. For a day’s work I got two meals and a basket of potatoes. The women saw it was hard for me, and later they left me in the kitchen, where I cooked a hearty supper for an average of 15–20 people. Our landlady and her sons were lousy with lice, and lice didn’t pass us by either. The village was relatively wealthy, and despite requisition quotas people were not starving. Lila started going to school in Turza. When the teacher asked the children what each had eaten for breakfast—Lila said “dziamę,” because that’s what the mixture [feed mix] was called there. All the children laughed at Lila. We had no help from anywhere. I felt I wouldn’t last long in Turza. One day I went to Sącz on a reconnaissance. I rode a freight train in the guard’s booth with a railwayman, and again there were amorous advances, which I barely wriggled out of. It was the first time in about 10–12 years that I came to Sącz. I cried and laughed by turns as I walked the streets. I went to our “street.” “Our” house stood. I walked into strangers in “our” apartment. It was like a Fata Morgana in the desert. An elusive mirage. Then I went to Zawadę near N. Sącza, where to this day relatives of my Father live: the Zarębas and the Kumors told us they would take us in. I don’t remember how I got from N. Sącz to Gorlice, from where I walked to Turza (about 10 km). After arriving in Turza I went to the sołtys to ask for a cart. He didn’t give one. He explained that if we didn’t leave they would have to support us, because we had nothing left, and we probably wouldn’t die of hunger and cold. He didn’t give one, and yet most peasants—and Turza is a large village—had horses. The sołtys magnanimously advised us to go along with the Germans who would come here for hay. We had no other way out, and at the appointed time we pulled up in our landlady’s cart (the cart was pulled by cows) to the sołtys’s house. We were there around 11 and left after dark. At the sołtys’s the smell of frying scrambled eggs wafted, there was bread and milk on the table, and we set out with only dry bread. The Germans loaded two carts with hay “up to the ceiling.” On the bottom of one they put our belongings (a kilim, a bit of bedding, photographs, documents, and remnants of clothing). On the [second] we barely “wystyrmali” ourselves [managed to perch] and, swaying, set off on our way. The Germans, probably by order, sang the Polish anthem almost the whole way, naturally mangling it badly—they were losing, and so they were becoming “Polish patriots.” We arrived in Gorlice around midnight. The Germans unloaded the hay elsewhere, and our “estate” stayed there too. We stayed with the Germans in quarters. They treated us to hot coffee and bread. In the morning we started looking for a means of transport to Sącz. The railway was out, because we didn’t get a pass. We stood on the road a long time until one German agreed to go for the children and our things and take us to N. Sącz. We had remnants of vodka and bacon and promised them to the driver. We arrived in Sącz—got out at the market—the German looked at us and didn’t take payment. I went to Mrs Doroszukowa at 3 Różana Street. Unfortunately she wasn’t at home; the children, locked in, were looking out through the window onto the balcony. While waiting for Mrs Doroszukowa we went down to a shoemaker who had his workshop on the ground floor. Exhausted to the limit, I told him a few bitter truths about certain Poles. That great patriot took offense and didn’t even offer us water. Mrs Doroszukowa arrived, fed us “with what the house could provide,” and she herself was in poverty. We slept one night, and in the morning I went to Zawada, from where I came back with a cart and took the family to the relatives.
Zawada.
We first moved in with the Kumors. It was a childless marriage. They were raising Mietek Fręczek, whose mother—the sister of Kumorowa—died when Mietek was still a small boy. Kumorowa was a Zarębianka by birth—the daughter of my father’s sister. Kumor was an old, conceited man. He treated us like intruders—who were disturbing his peace. They had three rooms; they gave us the smallest little room right next to the kitchen, without a stove. At first we ate together; the fare was very simple, but that was nothing—we liked everything. Worse was that Kumor wanted to get rid of us. On the opposite side of the road lived Józef and Maria Zaręba. Józef too was a son of my Father’s sister. They had as many as 9 children. They were relatively well-off because they had 25 morgs of land and a piece of forest, but they had been terribly worn down by the war. Yet they were much warmer than Kumor, who moreover was the wójt and could really have helped us. The Zarębas whitewashed a room for us, lent us two beds, a trestle table, a bench, and two folding chairs, and again we had our own “home.” I tried to procure food as much as possible on my own—Kumor looked down on us. He didn’t believe that Tulu had been a professor at the Krzemieniec Lyceum, and I a teacher. Once I baked cookies with saccharin, made tea, and invited Kumor. On that occasion I showed him our diplomas, the youngest, five-year-old Ania, demonstrated reading the newspaper to him, and we managed to impress Mr wójt a bit. He arranged for a larger flour allotment for us and wooden clogs for Tulu. Kumorowa gave us 1 liter of wonderful milk (for 5 people). I went down to the cellars for potatoes as if to my own. Christmas was wonderful because there was enough bread, there was even a roll, a bit of meat in the form of a hen I earned, and a tree decorated with sugar cubes in tissue paper. I went to the name day of another Zarębianka, Ludmiła; that too was a childless marriage, also “zdebowate” [wooden/stiff], but I ate my fill there of sausage and cake and got tipsy on samogon [moonshine]. To repay the Zarębas, the kindest of all those relatives, I taught two of their children, Hanka and Józek, to read and write (at present Hanka has finished a vocational tailoring school, married, has a beautiful house and 3 children. Józek is preparing for his master’s exam in extramural studies). Along with teaching the Zarębas, two children of neighbors also came to lessons, and Ania learned too. All this lasted not quite 3 months, because in January 1945 (exactly January 20). Just a few days earlier some German detachment had come to Zawada and carried to the Kumors a whole slaughtered piglet. They didn’t manage to eat it; they had to flee. Kumorowa called me to “dress” it. For the first time in my life I undertook such a job. I took Tulu’s razor and shaved the piglet with it, and then they helped me split it. I got a whole half from the Kumors. I gave a quarter to the Zarębas and a quarter remained for us. It was a splendid feast. Night came, again bullets across the yard whistled like swallows. I had to go to the well for water; a bullet literally flew past my ear. We piled into the cellar with the Zarębas, but we sat there only one night. I couldn’t sit still and kept going out of the cellar and watching the fighting. Zawada up on the hill. Below, N. Sącz; the sky was dark navy, lit densely by shells. One terrible nightmare—the Germans—were gone. In the morning Bolshevik units entered Zawada. There were swarms of them at the Zarębas’ and the Kumors’. They stole literally out of people’s hands, they raped women. Since I knew the Ukrainian language, I often had to intervene in various matters at the neighbors’. At the Kumors’ the captain himself moved in, which made Kumor immensely proud. They gave up the best room to him, in which there was a chest of drawers, and in it two gold wedding rings, a gold chain, and a large gold pocket watch locked in a drawer. The “gentleman” captain had to go on toward Berlin, but before that he pried up the top of the chest and took “as a keepsake” all the gold. There were countless such thefts. During the fighting the beautiful Sącz castle was blown up. The castle was blown up on the orders of the Bolshevik troops, entirely needlessly. In my youth various ceremonies were held in the castle courtyard. In the rooms they held exhibitions of paintings by such painters as Reguły, or the excellent portraitist Barbacki (he died at German hands as a hostage). In the little wood surrounding the castle I gathered podpieńki and gołąbki [honey fungus and russulas]. The Germans blew up the bridge over the Dunajec. The end of the bridge along which I had walked with my dad as a child, and later with girlfriends, and with Tulu as my fiancé. I watched from the bank as the Soviets laid a pontoon bridge. The winter was mild, the water high and turbid. A soldier, before my eyes, fell in and drowned, and no one tried to save him. In a short time they “patched” and cobbled together the old bridge, and in that state it had to serve people for a few more years. After it was dismantled, they took the parts to Opole, and there it continues to serve people. Very normal times began for us. Already in January Tulu started teaching. He walked from Zawada on foot, in wooden clogs; often his entire day’s food was a plate of “dziama” with milk [mash/porridge]. Classes were held in various houses all over town; there were also classrooms in the tenement where we had lived before the war. Lila started going in Zawada to the 6th grade, and Otuś to the 2nd. Otuś had a nice navy suit (altered from Tulu’s), and for the protection of the clothes I dressed him in a “szewski” apron [cobbler’s apron], until Otuś rebelled and didn’t want to wear the apron to school anymore. In the spring the children ran around outdoors all day. Once Otuś and Ania fell into the manure slurry. In Zawada, too, Ania and Otuś came down with whooping cough; Ania in particular had a hard time with it. I began to look for an apartment in town. It was extremely difficult. Marysia Korpińska (an old friend of ours from the same street) advised me that in Helena, at Chełmiecka 3, there was a post-Jewish little house where people from Poznań were living, and who were returning to their own parts. I went to the Housing Office and they assigned it to us. Unfortunately, in the meantime Mrs Sekułowa quickly moved into it with her three sons and wouldn’t budge. I asked at the magistrate’s to be assigned some other apartment, but they said they would file a complaint against that lady and she would have to move out. The matter went to court and Mrs Sekułowa received an eviction order. (She had a sister on the same street, Mrs Cieślowa, and at her place she had an apartment) but that didn’t help, and Tulu was walking kilometers from Zawada every day. I had a “brilliant” idea: I loaded our belongings onto a cart and we moved into half the little house through the window (the house had three little rooms and a kitchen). Only then did Mrs Sekułowa move into her sister’s apartment, and later to a fine apartment in the gmina.
Chełmiecka 3.
It was a little house made up of 3 small rooms, a kitchen, and a large veranda. It also had a patch of garden. Tulu taught—I, out of necessity, only ran the household—because the teaching post they offered me was far out in the village—they wouldn’t give me one in Sącz. It was hard in every respect, financially and in terms of every convenience. Water was far away, lighting was kerosene. In the flat the “furniture” consisted of two beds from Zawada (each different); I borrowed [another] simple wooden bed from an old schoolmate and that was the “bedroom,” the iron one stood in the other little room. There was trouble with the ticking for the mattresses because you had to go all the way to Zawada for straw. The “etagères” were made from UNRRA boxes (these were packages sent by the USA for the starving population), precisely “United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration,” an international organization set up in the USA in 1943 under the banner of providing economic aid to the peoples of countries destroyed by war, dissolved in 1947. Curtains hung on strings. The second room had an iron bed, a huge table from the Jesuit boarding school, and chairs the pupils carried over for us, along with two nightstands. Tulu somehow got hold at school of a huge wardrobe, which served us both as a clothes wardrobe and partly as a pantry. We whitewashed the flat ourselves (later every year Hania came from Zawada, or Józia Kulawa’s mother—Przybyłowa). The garden with two apple trees was important; I bought about 2 bushes of “smorodyn” [currants]. I was very happy with that garden and put a lot of work into it. Tulu earned little. I walked to Zawada for potatoes. They never brought even a measure [miarka], perhaps later when we were ordering 3–6 m. for the winter [of firewood] and 2–3 kopy of cabbage [kopa = 60 heads]. I dug those potatoes myself for free and naturally loaded myself with them like a horse—a backpack completely full and two bags—and walked 6 km one way with that. Often I literally had nothing to give the children for supper, and then I remember during the long June days we simply went to bed. I gave private lessons. Various mothers also came asking for a recommendation from Tulu. They wanted to give something—I excused myself but inwardly begged God that they would insist and leave the present. Food queues were like a continuation of the war—a plague. They would allot 1 kg, sometimes even 1/2 kg of sugar or flour, and you’d stand for hours in a queue for that! The children didn’t want to stand. I was often shoved out of the line—I had to argue, and our children were cross with me because of it. When they started rationing food it was a bit better, but there was too little of it to avoid standing in queues altogether. Clothing was a nightmare. Marysia Korpińska worked with American relief and about three times brought a few little clothes in a handbag. Sometimes Aunt Hela (she worked in Kudowa, and her eldest son Kazik attended our high school, and later all three boys were with us) sent some German cast-off “rags,” and that’s how we managed, but step by step it got a little better. We went with the children to Kudowa to Hela’s about twice; compared to us she had a lovely flat, and we didn’t want to go back from her place to our junk. I very often had headaches; in general, in the afternoons I felt like “peas by the path.” Otuś probably worried about it the most and sometimes late at night brought me painkillers from the neighbors. These were probably all the effects of wartime experiences and hard work. When the gate creaked, I would freeze with fright. The displaced doctor Isterewicz told me to lie “flat on my stomach,” measure my pulse, and take some medicines. That whole “affair” was before Easter; I then ran the children from bed—Lila kneaded and baked the cake. I rested—I came out of it, and often it seemed to me afterward that there was no job I couldn’t manage. And there was plenty of work, because already on Chełmiecka Street almost without interruption, besides our own children, we initially had Hela’s two boys and later three. Naturally, no washing machine, no water, no light. To somehow make ends meet I leased a piece of field from Bastowa—our milkwoman. The stay was enlivened by Hela’s visits—first with the children and later to the children. I remember for one holiday I started early to put aside flour and sugar and then baked cakes from 30 kg of flour. It wasn’t much at all for six children. Iwonka was only born on 30 Oct 1949. For the girls—or for Lila—I sewed coats from blankets. One Christmas Eve we had borscht with soap. In winter we ran the kitchen in one room. A makeshift iron stove, one table with the children crowded around it, a kerosene lamp, dark. I hastily set the ladle down on a bar of soap, which stuck to it and fell into the borscht. We always had a lot of fish for the holidays—it was the cheapest “dunajcówka” [fish from the Dunajec]. For Christmas Eve we sat on the bench, on the bed, on two chairs, on crates. Tulu would take out several of his little tweezers for removing fish bones. There was always kutia and apple strudel.
The children helped me a lot—there were weekly duty rotas; the older ones also had to carry water, light the stove, sweep, and run errands.
30 Oct 1948, Iwonka was born. Maybe it was a reaction after the war, or maybe self-defense against approaching old age—anyway, we were all happy at Iwonka’s birth. I looked up her names in the calendar. The whole family knew we were going to have a child. The christening was solemn. The godmother was Hela and the godfather Olek—my siblings. The children went to school, went away for the holidays, I stayed by myself. The aunts found her name “Iwonka,” and that’s what we called her and still do. Only when enrolling her in school did I learn what name Tulu had really given her: Urszula–Elżbieta. That was Tulu’s beloved “Koszulka,” as Tulu called her. Before Iwonka’s birth we often went together to the Chełmiec forest, or to Klimkówka—to the forests of my youth. I’m extremely fond of orchids, and when I saw them for the first time after the war in the Sącz forest, I literally shouted for joy. We went to Rytro, Głębokie. Those were also the places I had gone to already in childhood. It was hard, there was a lot of work, but the home was pleasant, the little street quiet. We kept dogs—first there was “Ksenia.” The children were heading to that library and burst into the house screaming that Ksenia was dead. They cried terribly—a Soviet car had run her over. The second dog was a splendid German Shepherd—Reks. He went bathing with us, went on walks. The end of the idyll came when our house was bought by the hairdresser Jurkowski. Some Jew, a successor, turned up and sold the house. From that moment on Jurkowski kept visiting us. He tore off apples, piled junk in the yard. He fixed the roof, and finally he put poison out for the dog. We tried to save him. We took him to the vet, gave him milk to drink, and the dog recovered. But not for long, because when he dosed him a second time, nothing helped. That Jurkowski was worse than a brute. Then he started pestering us to swap flats with him. He tormented us so much that we finally decided to do it. We gave him the cultivated garden, a clean flat, and he [gave us] a bedbug-infested flat and a dreadful yard, because Jurkowski kept pigs and a cow. The yard was one manure heap. Work in the garden simply swept me away. We covered the manure heap, dug over the entire yard and the garden in front of the house. At first we had all vegetables in abundance, later there was less because the sycamore and the big apple trees grew and shaded part of the garden. There were so many flowers that when there wasn’t money for bread, Olek and Alek went to the market and sold them. Even so, the financial situation was hard, and so I bought small piglets, raised them .... in the .... cellar, and after some time called the butcher. Kazik and Lila were already at university. When the piglet got turned into puddings and sausage, both we and the children in Kraków had something to eat. Exactly when Iwonka was 6 years old we were tempted once more by a little dog. It was a tiny German Shepherd, like a little ball. He grew up together with the children, was their darling, and especially Iwonka adored him. Tragedy struck him already at our present flat. They poisoned him. I went on a trip with Tulu and Iwonka was home alone—she took it terribly hard. I don’t want any dog or cat anymore. Szaruś, that little cat from Krzemieniec, also died of poison. In general the Sącz people are mean—they threw us out of food queues and threw us out of two houses, poisoned our dogs, cut down that lovely little tree we had planted, covered the flowers with sand.
Hela moved in with us for good, with her furniture—I threw out those cobbled-together odds and ends and then it was so-so at home, but the crowding was terrible—in the first year in Helena there were 10 of us. In summer it was half bearable because the little room in the attic saved us, but winter was awful. On top of that, chronic lack of money, because Hela initially worked as a housekeeper in a boarding school and earned very little. Tulu taught from morning till night (at times over 60 hours a week), but it was still too little, especially when autumn came and we had to stock the house with fuel, potatoes, cabbage, shoes and coats for the children. Usually, when I went to town over the bridge, I cried, or prayed to find some money or for someone from America to send us some. Lila and Kazek were already at university, Olek was finishing high school, Radek and Ania were catching up to him. I leased a field from Bastowa for potatoes, and once I even sowed wheat, but I had an awful lot of trouble with it. Hela and I washed and dyed old clothes and reworked them into new ones. Finally we hit on an idea and started embroidering blouses, dresses, collars. Tulu helped us with this, because he drew new patterns and transferred them. Lila had her part in it too. Sometimes we embroidered all night long. So as not to fall asleep, in summer we embroidered with the window open and, in the process, listened to the nightingales.
At last Hela moved to her own flat, which she managed to get with great difficulty. She took part of the furniture, and then we bought on installments a light dining-room suite. I was terribly pleased with it. Hela left the piano but only temporarily—on it Iwonka played, and a little Ania, and even Lila when she came to Poland from England. But the time for the piano came too—Kazek Unold took it. I felt sad, because since childhood my dream had been a piano. Violins wear me out when someone “saws” them. I like a violin orchestra. I love the piano immensely, I just can’t stand banging on the keys. I stood on my head and bought an old piano for 11,000 zł. That piano just stands there, because Iwonka is away from home, and when she comes she plays very little. Lila isn’t here. Nor is Otuś. Ania is far away. The piano is to be taken by Iwonka. Such was our fortune—our lot—that nowhere could we warm a place for long, and we had to leave the house in Helena. That little house was cracked—the fissure was visible right through—but Borus had his kennel there, and there were those few beds. Our landlord sold the house to Mrs Wróblówna. She bought it very cheaply and started persecuting us to move. We submitted an application to the housing office; we didn’t want a private house—besides, where to? Housing commissions said we had sufficient square meters; we wrote piles of applications—in vain, and meanwhile Wróblówna first cut down that pretty maple I had planted, then covered the little garden flowers with sand, tore up a piece of ceiling in the basement rooms, so that the floor in the room next to the kitchen lay only on joists for several winters. On top of that the stoves smoked, I swept out the soot twice a year. It was so cold in the flat that in winter the water in the kitchen constantly froze. What were we to do?! Renovate? With what? For whom? When Lila came with little Romuś (the second time), Wróblówna had a pit dug next to the house supposedly to check the state of the foundations—we were afraid Romuś would fall into it. After Lila left, I hit upon the idea of not whitewashing the flat, not stuffing the cracks with plaster but with cotton wool. It looked awful. With difficulty I called in a sanitary commission in winter, which found the conditions inhuman, but again the regular housing commission ruled that all these “deficiencies” were removable. “Round and round we went.” This tug-of-war disgusted me horribly!! Wróblówna was obliged to give us a flat, but she was in every sense of the word a SWINE. That wealthy, solitary woman. When they finally assigned us a flat, she didn’t want to give a penny for the deposit (6,000 zł), for the move, or for the apple trees planted by us. We got deeply into debt then, both to the ZNP and in ORS (Obsługa Ratalnej Sprzedaży—Installment Sale Service). If not for Tulu’s pupil—Furtek—there would also have been the costs of the move. There was a big problem with piles of books, newspapers, and other clutter that Tulu by no means wanted to part with, and the flat had an area of 46 square meters + a small cellar. I hit on an idea and, with my own money and the management’s consent, fenced off the storage under the stairs—now we have two little cellars; into one we crammed piles of books and newspapers, the other serves as a handy storeroom. Who and when will make use of those newspapers and old books? Water, a bathroom, and radiators are a wonderful thing, but the surroundings are dreadful—a kolkhoz. Our block is right in the very middle. There’s no balcony—you can’t go even an hour without curtains in the evening and, by day, without sheers. Smoke from the boiler room pours between the blocks as if through a chimney. Trampled lawns, children screaming. In the little house in Helena, when I embroidered at night with the window open, I heard nightingales singing. I long for greenery, for a little bed, and in addition it wears me down that Tulu feels very bad, especially in winter when the boiler rooms are firing and because of Biegonice. What a terrible mistake, an irreparable loss, those Biegonice. They built a factory of cathode electrodes there (about 4 km from Sącz). The beautiful Sącz Land, smoked over, gassed. They excuse themselves that the main motive was to relieve unemployment, and what turned out?! Fewer than 2,000 people were employed. Unemployment still exists. They “displaced” hundreds of farmers, and the land is fertile, beautiful. If instead of that factory they had built, for example, a vacation–tourist complex, how much greater the benefit would have been. I would blow that factory up. In the flat the flowers don’t want to grow. Besides, our girls claim that potted plants make a flat stuffy. Personally, I would throw out half the junk and put up metal trellises, partition the flat, and hang everything with flowers. I must get flower boxes, to have flowers at least in summer. And how did poor Borus feel! But at least the dog had us. We went out with him for walks. I don’t want to describe how he died! Why don’t people understand that people can love a dog, a cat! Besides, these are Sącz people! I’m ashamed I was born here. I have the impression that since they threw us out of houses and poisoned the animals, they’d poison us too to have more room for themselves. Before we moved in here, for nearly two months I went every day and painted and cleaned the flat. Now I keep moving the furniture around, because I want to bring a little variety into the prison. They were going to bring in gas and new expenses. Now, as I’m copying this for Lila, the gas is already in—it cost about 10,000 zł. It’s convenient, but getting it installed cost an enormous amount of health and energy, because the workmen botch things, drink, and demand bribes.
I haven’t written anything about the floods in Helena. We went through one flood on Chełmiecka. The water flooded the street, the garden, reached only up to the threshold. I took the children and went to a relative on “Paścią Górę.” That relative (he’s no longer alive) was a forester. From there we watched the flood; there we ate wonderful venison (I prefer not to think of the shot little doe). Two floods and several flood alarms we went through in the second flat, and since the house had basement rooms, they were always flooded almost to the ceilings. During one flood Ania didn’t manage to leave for her practicum, because the water tore up the railway lines, and she came back home with a suitcase on her shoulder, wading through the little street nearly waist-deep in water. The boys rode in a bathtub and a washtub along the street. When the water receded, we had to carry tons of silt out of the basement rooms. With us it still wasn’t so terribly bad. From the railway track I saw houses over the Dunajec flooded with roaring, murky water up to the roofs. Soldiers were taking people out on pontoons. They waited to return to their homes at the gmina office whose building stood by the main road (now there are private flats there). With us too the Lup family installed themselves. When it rained for several days in a row, there was already an alarm. We would bring up a supply of coal from downstairs, take all the wood upstairs. We hauled in drinking water from the well, I bought bread and sugar, potatoes, and we waited for the flood. We went out in raincoats to watch the water rising on the Dunajec. In the house it was damp and “atmospheric.” Iwonka was very afraid and all night kept asking how much the water had fallen, and it was exactly the opposite—the water was rising. Here there are no floods, but there is almost daily a flood of smoke.
People of Sącz.
There’s a saying that in the old days, when Sądeczanie turned to Starosądeczanie (Stary Sącz, a small town 7 km from Sącz) to borrow a gallows, they were refused, with the words that they had it for themselves and their children. That is, in general, the mentality of the people here. Right after the war I reported to the inspectorate asking for a job in Nowy Sącz. I was refused and was being offered one in the countryside. Tulu taught at the liceum, the children went to the liceum, there was no public transport. The roads were awful. To live in a village with the younger children and run two households?! So I had to give up and we had to live on Tulu’s meager salary. In Sącz only their own people worked. Tulu probably wouldn’t have gotten a job either, but he had already started in January 1946, and there was a lack of people with higher education.
Only thanks to strong patronage (our neighbor Janas was an inspector) did I get, in ’58, a job in Biczyce; it was a contract. Buses already ran; besides, whenever I could I commuted by bicycle. My zeal knew no bounds; I had longed for this work for years. I also studied on my own, because during the years of “unemployment” I had forgotten many things amid the menial chores. In Biczyce I put on plays, trips; I had good results, and that may have contributed to my getting a job in Chełmiec, and this time a permanent post. In Chełmiec it was drudgery! Every year I painted benches, doors, windows, laid out little gardens; I bought aquariums and teaching aids, especially for history, with my own money. I staged performances (for one performance the sets and costume designs were made for me by Lila, who happened to have arrived then from England). That performance even ended up in the press. At the performance—or rather a staging of the poetry of M. Konopnicka—old people cried, even the teachers. I read Pan Tadeusz and Sienkiewicz to the children “from cover to cover,” and finally I was building a school. A school had to be built there sooner or later, but it was mainly my efforts that brought the construction forward by a good few years. The conditions there were terrible. The children were crammed into a former C. K. Austrian building at a crossroads. When cars passed, the ceilings shook, until one day there was a failure and one ceiling threatened to collapse completely. The large classrooms upstairs and two on the ground floor were taken out of service. To get any additional rooms it was necessary to organize a march with the children to the Presidium of the Powiat National Council; I argued, I was the initiator. They rushed in from the Party and finally gave us the keys to an old three-room granary. One class had only one window. The children were going blind. I took photos of those “facilities,” and having faithfully described the conditions (the meeting with the authorities took place in the evening in the Remiza, so no one would have bothered to come to the school anyway), I backed up my words with the photos, which I handed to the authorities. A pity I didn’t keep any as a memento. After that meeting the Komitet Budowy Szkoły was formed, and I myself put forward my candidacy for secretary. The whole family helped me in drafting various letters. Otuś helped me a great deal; by virtue of serving as a referent in the spatial planning department he knew the plans for the expansion of Chełmiec, etc. There were many opponents of building the new school; the various intrigues and obstacles would not be written down even on an oxhide [i.e., innumerable], but at last the construction of the school was approved, and that same year the foundation work began. Within a year a beautiful 12-room school was built. However, such disgust at those people came over me that I transferred to Nowy Sącz. I got a job at Szkoła Podstawowa Nr 13 – Cwiczeń. It is a promotion, but the work is also enormous and the premises are very poor.
Since I am already on this subject, I will add my transition to retirement. It was not, despite my 64 years, voluntary. They forced me out, because I felt fine and the teaching profession is my life’s passion. Anticipating that they would dismiss me I submitted an application to the inspectorate and the kuratorium asking to keep me employed. Nothing helped. I copy here my application.
Board of the Kraków School District
in Kraków.
On 29 May 1972 I received from the Department of Education in N. Sącz a letter notifying me that I was being retired.
I hereby lodge an appeal against this decision for the following reasons:
I started copying out that application and gave up. Nuts! They let me go, period. Just one more thing on the subject. When I was defending myself like a lion against going into retirement, one of the teachers told me: "It's hard—age comes and you have to leave. For railwaymen, as soon as they hit 60 they absolutely have to go." I was indignant at such a comparison and said that if a writer hits 60 then he mustn’t write, a poet create, a painter paint.
I at least fought for as much as that, that despite the relatively too short period—only 21 years of work—I was receiving a pension not much smaller than Tulu’s. Tulu has 2420 zł—I've got 2379 zł. Maybe now I’ll still manage to devote time not so much to the children as at least to the grandchildren! The children and I! Lila was 6, Otuś only 2 when the war started. Ania was born at the beginning of the war, Iwonka a short time after the war, and all my effort was directed above all not so much at bringing them up as at keeping the children alive. When the situation finally began to improve, essentially the children had already grown up and started leaving home one after another. I had no time to raise them in any organized, deliberate way; besides, the children seemed such a part of me, simply my whole self, that I often caught myself feeling as if they had been with me since my earliest years, that they feel and think just as I do. My father inscribed for me in such a book—a diary m.p. [abbr. unclear] "He who rises early, the Lord God gives him good," "With truthfulness you will get through the world," "Love of the Homeland and honor are the most important good," and so on. I read Rodziewiczówna, Kraszewski, Sienkiewicz, Mickiewicz, Słowacki, Konopnicka. The ideals of those writers became my ideals. I was foolish and I am foolish, though so-called honest. I wrote many things that take place already after the war, but those are, well, the consequences of the war.
I would still like to write a lot about the children, about their youthful years, about their studies and life as adults. The one thing that cannot be changed is that their worries, their life, arouse in me a constant anxiety; they often rob me of sleep. Although many things make me happy, although I would like at least to embroider some pretty things, because really that’s about all I can do (I can’t play, I can’t paint), in the end I would rather die already so as to stop forever fearing and worrying about the children.
[Erased, almost illegible lament about children]
We took ... an allotment plot to somehow keep going. Our children are good, but a bit aloof and they don't even like being looked at, and as for touching them—God forbid. You can't say anything heartfelt either. I walk around like a fool and pretend I am indifferent to them, that everything is in order; what I am writing now will also be criticized and ill received. Lila once told me that in England, in the West in general, as soon as children grow up a bit they drift apart from their parents and hardly take any interest in one another. Can it really be like that? I know that more than once I made mistakes in our mutual relations, but I never did anything bad deliberately. I don't know—maybe Otuś won't concern himself too much with the children, but I don't know whether it will be a matter of indifference to Lili how Romuś is arranging his life. I know, Liluś, that you traverse not only thousands of km to be in Poland, but also to see us. Forgive that sometimes in anger I blurted out something foolish; I regretted and still regret every bad word. I regret that I watch television when you are here; I do it deliberately, as if it were nothing since you will soon be leaving. And again I would like to sleep through this time so as not to fear a mishap during your journey. It's a thousand times easier for Tata, because though he's supposedly a fatalist, he's a thousand times more of an optimist than I am. When you, Liluś, were little and the doctor stated enlarged hilar glands [hilar lymph nodes] in you, then as soon as I went out onto the street I cried out of fear for you. That's how much of a scaredy-cat I am. I know that for you, Lilu, every trip to Poland is tied to disappointment. When one longs, one idealizes everything, and here we both, with Tata, are getting older, and with age we acquire many different habits, flaws, unpleasant changes in appearance and in how we move. Well then, youth has its rights, and old age can't have any?
At the end I wrote a bit of "nonsense," and that's mainly why I dawdled about handing over this "diary," and I felt like cutting out the last pages, but here you have it, Lilu.
Mama.
7-X-1973 - Warszawa.
