[Erased, almost illegible lament about children]
We took ... an allotment plot to somehow keep going. Our children are good, but a bit aloof and they don't even like being looked at, and as for touching them—God forbid. You can't say anything heartfelt either. I walk around like a fool and pretend I am indifferent to them, that everything is in order; what I am writing now will also be criticized and ill received. Lila once told me that in England, in the West in general, as soon as children grow up a bit they drift apart from their parents and hardly take any interest in one another. Can it really be like that? I know that more than once I made mistakes in our mutual relations, but I never did anything bad deliberately. I don't know—maybe Otuś won't concern himself too much with the children, but I don't know whether it will be a matter of indifference to Lili how Romuś is arranging his life. I know, Liluś, that you traverse not only thousands of km to be in Poland, but also to see us. Forgive that sometimes in anger I blurted out something foolish; I regretted and still regret every bad word. I regret that I watch television when you are here; I do it deliberately, as if it were nothing since you will soon be leaving. And again I would like to sleep through this time so as not to fear a mishap during your journey. It's a thousand times easier for Tata, because though he's supposedly a fatalist, he's a thousand times more of an optimist than I am. When you, Liluś, were little and the doctor stated enlarged hilar glands [hilar lymph nodes] in you, then as soon as I went out onto the street I cried out of fear for you. That's how much of a scaredy-cat I am. I know that for you, Lilu, every trip to Poland is tied to disappointment. When one longs, one idealizes everything, and here we both, with Tata, are getting older, and with age we acquire many different habits, flaws, unpleasant changes in appearance and in how we move. Well then, youth has its rights, and old age can't have any?
At the end I wrote a bit of "nonsense," and that's mainly why I dawdled about handing over this "diary," and I felt like cutting out the last pages, but here you have it, Lilu.
Mama.
7-X-1973 - Warszawa.