Informing on Poles, arrests by the Germans and murdering them went on all the time. Then the Ukrainians themselves began murdering individual Poles, then entire villages, settlements. At Easter news came from Chodak that Julek Unold had been murdered, that this and that acquaintance had been killed in the county, and then a whole avalanche of murdered Poles, entire families with children, the elderly, entire villages. The Poles defended themselves, fled to larger concentrations—they organized themselves (Read “Czerwone noce” by Cybulski). Many Poles from the surrounding villages found themselves in Krzemieniec, whole phalanxes of refugees, already under the cover of German rifles, were heading to Krzemieniec. For some time I went out every day to the “Wiśniowiecka Rogatka” and, in tears, waited for Hela with the children. I saw those poor people, some on wagons, others on foot with bundles and children. They slept on boards in the lyceum church, they dispersed among Polish homes; from the German side there also awaited them the danger of deportation for labor to Germany. The Poles—the inhabitants of Krzemieniec—organized things for them and helped as best they could. I, together with Mrs Doroszukiewa, also cooked a bucket of soup several times. We chipped in together for it. Mostly it was potatoes with dumplings. The soup was with omasta. I went around the Ukrainian neighbors and directly demanded fat. Some gave, like the Skibinieccy; others, like the spiteful Ukrainian woman Turkowa, didn’t want to give a single slice. When, outraged and shaken, I spoke about it, she told me: “well, that’s tough, where they chop wood, chips fly.” Phalanxes—whole wagon trains of Poles—were leaving their settlements, until finally in one train there was Unoldowa Maria with two children—the wife of Jan Unold, cruelly murdered in Szumsk. She lived with us. Right after our escape from Krzemieniec, she too managed to escape. She lived in Opole. The children got an education, married. She has already died of cancer. Hela, on the other hand, fled with the children to Ostróg—from there to Bożęcin near Tarnów, where at that time two of our brothers, Kazek and Staszek, lived. Of the four Unold brothers, only one, Apolinary, was miraculously saved, and three perished. One of them, Florian—the head of a school near Kowel—was killed together with his wife Danka, precisely at Easter. The nine-year-old eldest son (Zbyszek) and his two younger brothers (one was an infant) survived. The godparents of one of them from Kowel took care of them, but when they later fled from Kowel, the youngest little boy was shot and also died. The eldest—Zbyszek—buried his mother and father himself, and had only a Ukrainian teenage friend to help. The Sołtys was afraid to take on the burial because it was forbidden to bury “Lachów.” He was afraid to give those children a cart so they could go to Kowel. The son of our landlady was a militiaman. We had a bicycle and he borrowed it almost every day. Tulu from the museum would come and yell at me for having lent out the bicycle. I would go to them as if to the scaffold and ask for it back (they lived in an outbuilding in the yard). They gave it back to me with a sullen look. It was like that a dozen or so times, but we saved the bicycle and sold it just before our flight from Krzemieniec.
One day people started milling about the yard, speaking Ukrainian among themselves. I asked them what they were doing there, and they said they had fled from Rybcza (a village near Krzemieniec) from the Ukrainians. Surprised, I said that after all they were murdering Poles, not Ukrainians—then I got the answer that they were Poles but did not know Polish. The Ukrainians do not ask whether one is from this land since grandfather and great-grandfather; they just murder, and they also murder mixed marriages.
Our children during the war