It was a little house made up of 3 small rooms, a kitchen, and a large veranda. It also had a little garden plot. Tulu taught—I out of necessity only kept house—because the teaching post they offered me was far away in the village; in Sącz they didn’t want to give me one. It was hard in every respect, financially and in terms of every convenience. Water was far away, lighting was by kerosene. In the apartment the “furniture” consisted of two beds from Zawada (each different); I borrowed [another] simple wooden bed from an old classmate and that was the “bedroom”; the iron one stood in the second little room. There was trouble with the bedticks because one had to go all the way to Zawada for straw. The “etagères” were made from UNRRA boxes (these were packages sent by the USA for the starving population), precisely “United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration,” an international organization created in the USA in 1943 under the slogan of providing economic assistance to the populations of countries destroyed by war, dissolved in 1947. The curtains hung on strings. The second room had an iron bed, a huge table from the Jesuit boarding school and chairs that the pupils carried over for us, along with two nightstands. Tulu somehow procured at school a huge wardrobe, which served us both as a clothes closet and partly as a pantry. Tulu and I whitewashed the apartment ourselves (later every year Hania came from Zawada, or Józia the lame’s mother—Przybyłowa). The garden was important, with two apple trees; I bought some 2 bushes of “smorodyn” [currants]. I was very happy with that garden and put a lot of work into it. Tutu earned little. I walked to Zawada for potatoes. They never brought even a measure to us, perhaps later when we were buying 3–6 m. for the winter [probably cubic metres (of wood)] and 2–3 kop of cabbage [unit of 60]. I dug those potatoes myself for free, and of course loaded myself with them like a horse—a backpack completely full and two bags—and walked with that 6 km one way. Often I literally had nothing to give the children for supper and then I remember on the long June days we would just go to bed. I gave private lessons. Various mothers also came asking for influence with Tulu. They wanted to give something—I made excuses, and in my heart I asked God that they would insist and leave the present. Queues for food were like a continuation of the war; it was a plague. They allotted 1 kg, sometimes even ½ kg of sugar or flour, and you stand for hours in line for that! The children didn’t want to stand. I was often pushed out of the queue—I had to argue, and our children were cross with me because of it. When they started rationing food with cards it was a bit better, but there was too little of it to avoid standing in queues altogether. With clothing—a nightmare. Marysia Korpińska worked with American relief and about 3 times brought a few clothes in a handbag. Sometimes Auntie Hela (she worked in Kudowa and her eldest son Kazik went to our lycée and then all three boys were with us) sent some “ciuchy,” German castoffs, and that’s how we managed, but step by step it got better and better. We were with the children about 2 times in Kudowa at Hela’s, who, compared to us, had a beautiful apartment—it was hard to want to return from her place to our junk. I had very frequent headaches; in general in the afternoons I felt like “peas by the path” [idiom: completely spent]. Otuś probably worried about this the most and sometimes late at night brought me headache powders from the neighbors. These were probably all aftereffects of wartime experiences and hard work. When the gate creaked, I would freeze in terror. The displaced doctor Isterewicz told me to lie flat, measure my pulse, and take some medications. That whole “affair” was before Easter; I then directed the children from bed—Lila kneaded and baked the cake. I rested—I came out of it—and often afterwards it seemed to me there was no job I couldn’t handle. And there was plenty of that work, because already on Chełmiecka Street, almost without a break, besides our children there were at first Hela’s 2 boys and later three. Naturally neither a washing machine, nor water, nor light. To make ends meet somehow I leased a piece of field from Bastowa—our milkwoman. The stay was diversified by Hela’s arrivals—first with the children and later to the children. I remember that for one holiday I started early to lay in flour and sugar and then I baked cakes with 30 kg of flour. It was not much at all for 6 children. Iwonka was only born on 30-X 1949. I sewed coats for the girls, or rather for Lila, out of blankets. One Christmas Eve we had borscht with soap. In winter the kitchen was run in one room. A makeshift iron stove, one table the children sat around, a kerosene lamp, dark. In haste I set the ladle down on the soap, which stuck to it and fell into the borscht. There was always a lot of fish for the holidays—the cheapest “dunajcówka” [fish from the Dunajec]. For the Wigilia we sat on a bench, on the bed, on two chairs, on boxes. Tulu would take out several of his tweezers for pulling bones from the fish. There was always kutia and apple strudel.
The children helped me a lot—there were weekly shifts; the older ones also had to carry water, light the stove, sweep, run errands.
On 30-X-1948, Iwonka was born. Maybe it was a reaction after the war, or maybe self-defense against approaching old age—enough to say that I was very happy at Iwonka’s birth. I searched out her names in the calendar. The whole family knew there would be a baby at our place. There was a solemn christening. Hela became the godmother and Olek the godfather—my siblings. The children went to school, left for holidays, I stayed home alone. The aunts found her name, “Iwonka,” and that’s what we called her and call her to this day. Only when registering her for school did I learn what Tulu had really given as her name: Urszula–Elżbieta. That is Tulu’s beloved “Koszulka,” as Tulu called her. Before Iwonka’s birth we often walked together to the Chełmiec forest, or to Klimkówka—to the forests of my youth. I love orchids immensely, and when I saw them for the first time after the war in the Sącz forest I actually screamed with joy. We went to Rytro, Głębokie. Those are also places I used to go already in childhood. It was hard, there was a great deal of work, but the house was pleasant, the little street quiet. We kept dogs; first there was “Ksenia.” The children were on their way to the library and burst into the house with a scream that Ksenia was dead. They cried terribly—a Soviet car had run her over. The second dog was a splendid German shepherd—Reks. He went bathing with us, went on walks. The end of the idyll came when our house was bought by the hairdresser Jurkowski. Some Jew, an heir, turned up and sold the house. From that moment Jurkowski kept visiting us. He tore down [came to pick] apples, piled junk in the yard. He “repaired” the roof, until finally he gave poison to the dog. We tried to save him. We went with him to the vet, made him drink milk, and the dog recovered. But not for long, because when he did for him a second time nothing helped anymore. That Jurkowski is worse than a beast. Then he kept coming to us so that we would exchange apartments with him. He tormented us so much that we finally decided to. We gave him a cultivated garden, a clean apartment, and he [gave] an apartment infested with bedbugs, and a horrible yard because Jurkowski kept pigs and a cow. That yard was one single manure heap. Work in the garden simply carried me away. We covered the manure heap, dug up the entire yard and the garden in front of the house. At first we had all vegetables in abundance, later there was less because the sycamore maple spread and the big apple trees grew and shaded part of the garden. There were so many flowers that when there was no money for bread Olek and Alek went to the market and sold them. Still, the financial situation was hard, and that’s why I bought small piglets, raised them .... in the .... cellar, and after some time I called the butcher. Kazik and Lila were already at university. When you turned a piglet into kiszki and kiełbasa, both we and the children in Kraków had something to eat. Just when Iwonka was 6, we let ourselves be tempted one more time by a dog. It was a little German shepherd, like a ball. He grew up together with the children, was their favorite, and Iwonka doted on him especially. Tragedy struck him already at the current apartment. They poisoned him. I went on a trip with Tulu and Iwonka was home alone; she took it terribly hard. I don’t want any dog or cat anymore. Szaruś, that kitten from Krzemieniec, also died from poison. In general the Sącz people are bad—they threw us out of food queues and threw us out of two houses, they poisoned our dogs, they cut down that pretty little tree we had planted, they covered the flowers with sand.
Hela moved in with us permanently, together with furniture—I threw out those cobbled-together pieces of junk, and the home was passable at last, but the crampedness was terrible; in the first year on Helena there were 10 of us. In summer it was half bad because the little attic room rescued us, but winter was awful. And a chronic lack of money, because Hela at first worked as a quartermaster in a boarding school and earned very little. Tulu taught from morning till night (at times he had over 60 hours per week), but it was all too little, especially when autumn came, when you had to supply the house with fuel, potatoes, cabbage, shoes and coats for the children. Usually when I went to town across the bridge I cried, or I prayed to find some money or for someone from America to send us some. Lila and Kazek already at university, Olek finishing lycée, Radek and Ania catching up. I leased a field from Bastowa for potatoes and once I even sowed wheat, but I had a terrible lot of trouble with it. We washed and dyed old clothes with Hela and reworked them into new ones. At last we hit on an idea and started embroidering blouses, dresses, collars. Tulu helped us with this because he drew new patterns and transferred them. Lila had her part in this too. We sometimes embroidered through whole nights. So as not to fall asleep, in summer we embroidered by the open window and listened to the nightingales.
At last Hela moved to her own apartment, which she obtained with great difficulty. She took part of the furniture, and then we bought on installments a light dining-room set. I was terribly happy with it. Hela left the piano, but only temporarily—Iwonka played it, and a bit Ania, and even Lila when she came to Poland from England. Well, the time came for the piano too—because Kazek Unold took it. I felt sad, because since childhood my dream had been a piano. Violins wear on me when someone “saws” them. I like a violin orchestra. I love the piano immensely, only I can’t stand banging on the keys. I stood on my head and bought an old piano for 11,000 zł. That piano stands, because Iwonka is away from home, and when she comes she plays very little. Lila isn’t here. Nor is Otusia. Ania is far away. Iwonka is supposed to take the piano. Such was our happiness—our lot—that we could never warm a place for long anywhere, and the little house on Helena had to be left. That little house was cracked, the fissure was visible straight through, but Borus had his kennel there, there were those few beds of vegetables. Our landlord sold the house to Mrs Wróblówna. She bought it very cheaply and began persecuting us to move out. We submitted an application to the housing office; we didn’t want a private house, besides—to where? The housing commissions said we had sufficient floor space, we wrote piles of applications—in vain, and meanwhile Mrs Wróblówna first cut down that lovely sycamore I had planted, then covered the flowers in the garden with sand, tore away a piece of ceiling in the cellars, so that the floor in the room next to the kitchen lay only on the joists for, what, two big winters. The stoves smoked on top of that, I swept out soot twice a year. It was so cold in the apartment that in winter the water in the kitchen constantly froze. What were we to do?! Renovate? With what money? For whom? When Lila came with little Romuś (the second time), Mrs Wróblówna had a pit dug next to the house, supposedly to determine the state of the foundations—we feared lest Romuś fall into it. After Lila left, I hit on the idea not to whitewash the apartment, not to plug the gaps with plaster but with wadding. It looked awful. With difficulty I called in a sanitary commission in winter, which found those conditions inhuman, but again the regular housing commission ruled that all those “deficiencies” could be removed. “And round and round we go.” This tug-of-war disgusted me terribly!! Mrs Wróblówna was obliged to give us an apartment, but she was, in every sense of the word, A PIG. That wealthy, solitary woman. When at last they assigned us an apartment, she didn’t want to give a penny toward the deposit (6,000 zł), or for the move, or for the apple trees we had planted. We went very much into debt then, with the ZNP and with ORS (Obsługa Ratalnej Sprzedaży). If not for Tulu’s pupil, Furtek, the moving costs would have been added to that as well. There was a big problem with the piles of books, newspapers and other odds and ends that Tulu absolutely refused to part with, and the little flat had an area of 46 square meters plus a small cellar. I hit on the idea and, with my own money and with the management’s consent, I fenced off the storage under the stairs; now we have two little cellars; in one we packed the piles of books and newspapers, the other serves as a handy storeroom. Who and when will ever use those newspapers and old books? Water, a bathroom and radiators are marvelous things, but the surroundings are awful—a kolkhoz. Our block right in the very middle. There is no balcony—you can’t go an hour without curtains in the evening or in the day without sheers. Smoke from the boiler room pours between the blocks like through a chimney. Lawns trampled bare, children shouting. In the little house on Helena, when I embroidered at night by the open window I heard the nightingales sing. I long for greenery, for a garden bed; it wears me down on top of that that Tulu feels very bad, especially in winter when they stoke the boiler rooms and because of Biegonice. What a horrible mistake, a loss impossible to make good, those Biegonice. They built a factory of cathode electrodes there (distance some 4 km from Sącz). The beautiful Sącz Land, smoked over, gassed. They justify it by saying the main motive was to relieve unemployment, and what turned out?! Fewer than 2,000 people were employed. Unemployment still exists. They “evicted” hundreds of farmers, and the land fertile, beautiful. If instead of that factory they had built, for example, a holiday-tourism complex, how much greater the benefit would have been. I would blow that factory up. Flowers won’t grow in the apartment. Besides, our girls claim that potted plants warm the apartment. Personally, I would throw out half the junk and have metal grilles made, partition the apartment, and hang everything with flowers. I must get flower boxes to have flowers at least in summer. And how poor Borus felt! But at least the dog had us. We took him out for walks. I don’t want to describe how he died! Why don’t people understand that people can love a dog, a cat! Besides, these are Sącz people! I am ashamed I was born here. I have the impression that as they drove us out of houses and poisoned the animals, they would poison us too to have more space for themselves. Before we moved here, for close to two months I went every day and painted and cleaned the apartment. Now I keep moving the furniture around, because I want to bring a little variety into the prison. They will be bringing in gas and new expenses. Now, as I write this to Lili, gas is already installed; it cost about 10,000 zł. It is a convenience, but having it run in cost an enormous amount of health and energy, because the workmen botch, drink, and demand bribes.
I haven’t written anything about floods on Helena. We went through one flood on Chełmiecka. The water flooded the street, the garden, it only forced itself under the threshold. I took the children and went to a relative on “Paścią Górę.” That relative (he is no longer alive) was a forester. From there we watched the flood; there we ate splendid venison (I’d rather not think about the shot little doe). We went through two floods and several flood alerts at the second apartment, and since the little house had cellars, they were always flooded almost up to the ceilings. During one flood Ania didn’t manage to leave for her work placement because the water tore up the railway lines, and she returned home with a suitcase on her shoulder, wading along the little street almost up to her waist in water. The boys rode on the bathtub and the washtub down the street. When the water fell, you had to carry out tons of silt from the cellars. With us it still wasn’t so terribly bad. From the railway line I saw houses on the Dunajec inundated by the roaring, turbid water up to the roofs. Soldiers were carrying people out on pontoons. They waited to return to their homes at the gmina office, whose building stood by the main road (now there are private apartments there). With us too the Lupów family installed themselves. When it rained for several days in a row, there was already an alert. We brought up a supply of coal from below, carried all the wood upstairs. We lugged in from the well water for drinking, I bought bread and sugar, potatoes, and we waited for the flood. We would go out in raincoats to see how the water was rising in the Dunajec. In the house it was damp and “atmospheric.” Iwonka was very afraid and all night long asked how many inches the water had gone down, and it was just the opposite—the water was rising. Here there are no floods, but there is almost every day a flood of smoke.