People of Sącz.
There’s talk that in former times when the people of Sącz turned to the people of Stary Sącz (a small town 7 km from Sącz) with a request to borrow a gallows, they were refused, being told that they kept it for themselves and their children. That is the mentality of the people here in general. Right after the war I applied at the inspectorate for a job in Nowy Sącz. I was refused and offered posts in the countryside. Tulu taught in a liceum, the children went to a liceum, there was no public transport. The roads were awful. To live in the countryside with the younger children and run two households?! So I had to give up, and we had to live on Tulu’s meager pay alone. In Sącz it was only their own people who worked. Tulu probably wouldn’t have gotten a job either, but he had already started in January 1946, and there was a shortage of people with higher education.
Only thanks to strong patronage (our neighbor Janas was an inspector) did I get, in ’58, a job in Biczyce; it was a contract. Buses were already running; besides, I commuted by bicycle whenever I could. My zeal knew no bounds; I had longed for this work for years. I also studied on my own, because during the years of “unemployment” I had forgotten many things while doing the dirty work. In Biczyce I put on performances, excursions, I had good results, and that may have contributed to my getting a job in Chełmiec, this time a regular post. In Chełmiec it was sheer drudgery! Every year I painted benches, doors, windows, set up little gardens, aquariums, I bought teaching aids with my own money, especially for history. I staged performances (for one of them Lila, who happened to have come then from England, did the sets and costume designs for me). That performance even made it into the press. At the performance, or rather an enactment of the poetry of M. Konopnicka, old people cried, even the teachers. I read to the children Pan Tadeusz and Sienkiewicz “from cover to cover,” and at last I built a school. A school had to be built there sooner or later, but mainly my efforts sped the construction up by a good few years. Conditions there were terrible. The children were crammed into a former C K Austrian building at a crossroads. When cars drove by, the ceilings shook, until once there was a failure, with a total collapse of one ceiling threatening. They shut down our large classrooms upstairs and 2 on the ground floor. To get any additional rooms, we had to arrange a march with the children to the Pres. of the County Nat. Council; I argued, I was the initiator. They came rushing from the Party and finally gave us the keys to an old three-room granary. One classroom had only a single window. The children were going blind. I took photos of these “facilities” and, having faithfully described the conditions (the meeting with the authorities was held in the evening in the Remiza [firehouse], so no one would have bothered to come to the school anyway), I backed up my words with the photos I handed to the authorities. A pity I didn’t keep any for myself as a keepsake. After that meeting a School Construction Committee was formed, and I myself put forward my candidacy for secretary. The whole family helped me draft various papers. Otuś helped me a great deal; by virtue of serving as a referent in the spatial planning department, he knew the plans for the expansion of Chełmiec and so on. There were many opponents of building a new school; the various intrigues and adversities wouldn’t be recorded even on an oxhide, but at last the school’s construction was approved, and that same year they set about laying the foundations. Within a year a beautiful 12-room school was built. However, I was overcome with such disgust for those people that I transferred to N. Sącz. I got a job at Szkoła Podstawowa Nr 13 - Cwiczeń. It is a promotion, but there is also an enormous amount of work and very poor premises.
Since I am on this subject, I will add my retirement. It was not voluntary despite my 64 years. They forced me out, because I felt fine and the teaching profession is my life’s passion. Anticipating being dismissed, I submitted an application to the inspectorate and the kuratorium asking to keep me employed. Nothing helped. I am copying my application here.