We took ... a garden plot to somehow keep going. Our children are good, but a bit standoffish, and they don't even like being looked at, and as for touching them—God forbid. One can't say anything affectionate either. I go around like a fool and pretend that I am indifferent to them, that everything is fine; what I'm writing now will also be criticized and poorly received. Lila once told me that in England, generally in the West, as soon as children grow up they split off from their parents and hardly take an interest in each other. Can it be like that? I know that more than once I made mistakes in our mutual relations, but I never did anything bad deliberately. Do I know—maybe Otuś won't worry much about the children, but I don't know whether Lila will be indifferent to how Romuś arranges his life. I know, Liluś, that you cover not only thousands of km to be in Poland, but also to see us. Forgive me that sometimes in anger I blurted something foolish; I have regretted every unkind word and I still do. I regret that I watch television when you are here; I do it deliberately, as if it's nothing since you'll soon be leaving anyway. And again I'd like to sleep through this time so as not to fear a mishap during your journey. For Tata it's a thousand times easier, for though supposedly a fatalist, he is a thousand times more of an optimist than I am. When you were little, Lilusiu, and the doctor found enlarged hilar lymph nodes in you, as soon as I walked out onto the street I cried out of fear for you. That's what a scaredy-cat I am. I know that for you, Lilu, every trip to Poland is coupled with disappointment. When one longs, everything gets idealized, and here the two of us, Tata and I, are getting older, and with age we accumulate many different habits, faults, unpleasant changes in appearance and in the way we move. Well, youth has its rights—can't old age have them too?
Toward the end I wrote some "nonsense," and that's mainly why I dragged my feet about handing over this "diary," and I felt like cutting out the last pages, but here you have it, Lilu.
Mama.
7-X-1973 - Warszawa.