On the “farm” we left Unold’s Maria. She too soon fled after us, and the farm was taken over by Gena Majkowa. What happened to the furniture—I don’t know, and there was quite a lot of it, because three rooms were furnished. Part of the bedding, dishes, and books we loaded into chests and trunks and left with neighbors “for safekeeping.” We had to flee—a black mass of Ukrainians around Krzemieniec. In Krzemieniec, rampaging Germans. Tula’s Polish coworkers were being hunted down by the Germans one by one. Any day now Tulu might not come home from the museum. The children had long been asking me for a kitten. Downstairs in the basement lived a woman. Her cat had lovely kittens. I got one—a beautiful gray. We named him Szaruś. The children didn’t want to leave the kitten in Krzemieniec and took him with them. Everyone later talked about the cat fleeing with us. Beforehand we gathered information and addresses needed for the escape. We had very little cash, because the Ukrainians didn’t want to buy—they knew anyway that we wouldn’t be taking our belongings with us; besides, those hyenas had enough off the Jews. We took with us the remnants of our clothes, some bedding. Tulu took along a lot of his gear, like a microscope, some special mirror, tweezers, etc. Now Tulu says he shouldn’t have taken it, but then it was hard for him to part with it. The most important things were documents and photographs. I took the kettle my mother bought me when I went to my post, and which still serves us to this day. We hired a cart and loaded our “property.” The children also got on it with the kitten and a toy monkey; we with Tulu went on foot into the unknown, terrifying. We did not receive a permit to leave, but at the railway station we got on the train without tickets. In the same compartment sat some Germans, but they pretended not to see us. That’s how we reached Dubno. We hauled out our things and set up camp in the waiting room. Supposedly some railwayman there was to seat us in a train bound for Brody, where Aldku—Tulu’s brother, then working on the railroad—was waiting for us, but there one train after another departed and we sat at the station. Tulu fainted. When I revived him, after talking it over, Tulu went to the railwaymen and showed them a gold five-ruble coin—it helped. They shoved us into a train, but what of it when at Radziwiłłów they ordered us to get off. It was the border station between the so-called Ukraine and the General Government. The next station was already Brody, and in it Aldku. The station was empty and we alone with a mountain of bundles and the children in the middle. A Polish railwayman came up to us and advised us to leave the platform quickly, because when the shift came on—and they were Ukrainians—we would be done for. We dragged our bundles and the children as best we could to the nearest house. We were lucky, because it was the house of a Polish railwayman. He installed us in a room from which, that very day, they had carried the body to the cemetery of that railwayman’s son, murdered by Ukrainians. Well into the afternoon a railwayman from Brody arrived, who took Lila and Otuś into a freight train to a signalman’s hut. He locked them in and I was terribly afraid of that separation. The children arrived safely; Aldku took them, who supposedly cried when he saw them. We were left alone with Ania in Radziwiłłów, because our hosts were not there. Suddenly, toward evening, we heard shooting, very close. We lay down on the floor under the windows and waited. Suddenly someone began bellowing at the windows; we were terribly frightened, thinking they were bandits, until we heard a voice: “Mr Duda—please open up.” That young, tall railwayman had come especially for us. He snatched Ania up in his arms and we took only the suitcase with documents and photographs and rushed after him to the locomotive waiting for us. On the tracks a German stopped us for a moment, but that railwayman replied energetically that he was rescuing us from bandits, and so we reached the engine. They had come for us on purpose; supposedly that railwayman ferried many families into the General Government for evacuation and himself was killed. We got off at night before the station and went to the agreed house to sleep. In the morning we went to Aldeks, where Lila and Oluś were already waiting for us. Supposedly safe, yet poor, homeless, helpless. All our belongings remained in Radziwiłłów, and only later, when that railwayman moved to Brody, did he bring over our “treasures” too. We obtained, for a fee, fake Kennkarten (equivalents of identity cards), and we waited for Nusia, who was to come for us from Zmigrod. When Nusia saw us, she was disappointed, because she thought that after all a professor’s family would be coming, and there we were with Tulu, thin, darkened, dressed in “God help us” rags, and three scrawny children. We walked for the last time in the garden at old Brody, slept under Tula’s family roof. In that little house, during the holidays, Otuś was christened. To that little house I used to come in my maiden days and then as a married woman; in that little house Lila stayed for a time under Babcia’s care. In that little house Ania was for the first and last time. We ate fruit from the trees Tulu had planted. The cottage was charming. It had a little porch overgrown with vines, an entry hall from which one entered a room and the kitchen on the right side, and on the left there were two little rooms, those cubicles separated by a thin wall not reaching the ceiling. Wooden floors, clean and yellow, white walls. In the garden lilacs, acacias, ash trees, fruit trees, and many flowers. We had to say goodbye to the Aldeks (they then had three sons), to the cottage, and go farther—to Zmigrod near Jasło. The road was awful. In Lwów, in Podzamcze, we waited a long time and into the train drifted the stench of burning bodies. In the train, incredible crush; the children stood the whole time on the benches behind people’s backs. In their arms they held the kitten, which struggled to get free. With difficulty we reached Jasło, and from there by some truck to Zmigrod. Auntie’s little flat, clean, cozy, peaceful, but unfortunately Julek—Nusia’s husband—was already then ill with tuberculosis. Tuberculosis had already taken over his whole body; he could no longer walk, for his legs were diseased too. With Nusia there then stayed Julek’s sister, Zosia Mrożkowa—the mother of the later well-known writer Mrożek. I remember that for supper there were potato dumplings. I don’t remember after how many days, probably the very next day, we moved into “our own.” It was a single room in a former Jewish house. Besides us, two more families lived there: the Przewłockis and the Brożyns. They had two-room flats. Mrs Przewłocka worked at the dairy. Przewłocki wrote poems. The Brożyns had a little daughter, Halinka, and the Przewłockis a small foster girl, Janeczka, sickly and very improperly dressed and brought up; during the front that child died. Tulu also worked at the dairy, and then it was a food paradise. There was lots of milk; we got cream and butter, there was bread and even meat. Nusia gave us some materials from which I sewed coats for Ania and Lila; I even refashioned clothes for Otuś and even for Kazik Unold (he was with us too) out of old garments. I also sewed myself as many as two dresses. In a word, paradise compared with Krzemieniec. I remember my first trip to the seamstress, who lived outside Zmigrod. I had to force myself to take that walk, because in Krzemieniec it was impossible because of the Ukrainian bands. Just before the escape from Krzemieniec we slept with axes under the beds so that in case of an attack we could defend ourselves. Not far from us they had already murdered our acquaintance, Górecki. Our “furniture” in Zmigrod was mostly from sawmill offcuts, nailed together by Tulu. There were two “couches” and a cabinet made of boards, and Nusia lent us one iron bed, a table, a small cabinet, and a few chairs. It was not much bigger, or perhaps the same size, as our present room. One couch was carried into the entryway by day. Kazik U. slept on it. He was supposed to be at Nusia’s, but I took him to us, because the sick Jurek had to have peace and Kazek was terribly talkative; secondly, I didn’t want a starved, emaciated boy to be in contact with a consumptive. On the shelves, as usual where Tulu is, there already lay neat stacks of newspapers. We used a lamp for light. In the evenings we sat at the table; the cat strolled under our chins [possibly: around our laps] or over our shoulders. As usual, I did not idle; I often cooked dinners at Nusia’s, helped her wash and clean; at our place too the floor had to be scrubbed, cooking done, etc. I taught Bogna and Otuś, and Lila even had a few piano lessons and went to school. I also went to Jasło with butter for the Germans; on that occasion I always took something to trade, most often veal, cream, butter (it was Nusia’s goods), but for us too I took enough that with that goods the dentist repaired my and Lila’s teeth. These were dangerous trips, because often at the entrance to Jasło the Germans searched us. For this purpose I took Lila and hid the goods under the seat; in the back there were crates of butter for the warehouse. Nusia always waited for our return in fear. Tulu often took the children for walks—they gathered ćereń [possibly chokecherries/sloes], from which I made an excellent syrup. Otuś fell ill again with pneumonia, but as always he came through it safely. The torment was Julek’s illness. Nusia, as they say, “stood on her head” to save him, but the inexorable tuberculosis consumed him. He was a very handsome fellow; he was a teacher, but even before the war Father drew him into the dairy (it was theirs). When the war broke out, Nusia with Julek took over the facility in Zmigrod, and Julek’s parents remained in Bożęcin. Kazik U. was in Zmigrod until First Communion, and he was the same age as Lila. That idyll did not last long—the front was approaching from the east. The Germans had fits of fury. The Home Army (AK) had its hands full. Almost the entire Żmigród intelligentsia belonged to the AK. By day they worked; at night they went on actions, and already the Germans were ordering trenches to be dug. I, on account of the small children, was exempted from this. Tulu, as a dairy worker, too. Some traitor betrayed the AK men. The Gestapo staged a raid on them. The front was already near—a “theater” was coming to Zmigrod; the “actresses” stayed in private homes. One of them stayed with the Brożyns, who belonged to the AK. As a precaution he cut out a little space under the floor to hide in in case of a search. The night was sultry; we slept with the window open. Suddenly I hear: “Das Fenster zumachen, aber schnell.” I closed the window and the Gestapo were already pounding on the entry door. Przewłocki opened for them, and the Germans went straight to us. They shone flashlights, saw Tula in bed, and said, “Gut, gut, der Mann ist zu Hause,” and pulled out a list of the condemned. They asked for Tula’s surname, which, however, did not appear on their list. They searched anyway and told Tulu to get dressed and took him to the Brożyns. Hearing the commotion at our place and in the entry, Brożyna instantly jumped into the little pit that was in the corner of the kitchen. In that spot stood a table covered with a cloth. The Germans slapped the “actress” in the face for not keeping an eye on Brożyna—they were simply raging. They ordered Tulu and Przewłocki to shift a pile of coal in the cellar. They jabbed with bayonets every bundle of straw in the attic. Brożyna vanished, and the house had been under observation since dusk. They took Tula and Przewłocki and ordered them to lead the way to the indicated addresses. Tula knew whom it was about, but he luckily wriggled out of it, saying he was a stranger, that he knew no one, and he led them to a house that wasn’t on the list. They beat Tula and ordered him to go home. Tula came drenched in sweat, because until the last moment he was sure they would kill him. My reaction was an unending scream. The Germans lunged at me and hushed me like a witch—and I surely looked like one, because I was in a black slip and had disheveled hair. The next day they told me that with that screaming I had alarmed the neighboring houses and the suspects had run away. When they took Tula, I was already sure I would never see him again. The Germans took Brożynowa, and said that if her husband did not report by morning, they would kill her. Tula and Przewłocki were gone—I was left alone with the children and little Halinka Brożynówna. The Germans told us to leave the light on and every moment burst into the house together with the “actress.” Little Halinka had a cradle fastened to the floor—I had to sit by her and rock her. After some time I heard from the little pit in the kitchen Brożyna’s voice, asking me to hand over his clothes, because he was only in his shirt. Brożyna’s clothes lay in the kitchen, but I handed him another from the wardrobe. Toward dawn Tulu came—an enormous relief. I told him about Brożyna. In the morning the lamenting family burst in and took Halinka, but I told them nothing about Brożyna. Only when the guard moved away from the house did I pass him breakfast under the table and some cigarettes, and Brożyna fled through the gardens into the forest. Brożynowa and several other hostages were assigned to the front, to the kitchen—after a time they began to badger [to plead with] the soldiers, and so all of them returned home. Then there was the attempt on Hitler. German troops were marching through Zmigrod—I stood in the doorway, and the soldiers waved their hands to me and shouted, “Matka! das Krüg ist cu ende.” Unfortunately for us, it was only then that the “Krüg” began. During that raid they took several people from Zmigrod and shot them. The front was approaching—when the houses began to shake from explosions, then we did the greatest stupidity with Nusia. We took the most valuable things, the sick Julek, and the children, and went to Kąty (closer to the Dukla Pass), right on the Wisłoka, in the hope that the front would bypass us, and there it was exactly the opposite.