Tulu worked at the Museum, an institution the Germans only ostensibly tolerated but in fact tried to destroy. They issued, for example, orders to vacate the existing museum premises within a single day. The staff frantically looked for another place and carried the exhibits on their backs themselves. I remember that Tulu earned so little that for a whole month’s “salary” you could buy one kilogram of butter on the “black market.” It was self-sacrificing work, but the museum survived and exists to this day, together with Tulu’s insect display cases and the enormous plant collections.
The food rations were not enough to keep even one person, and here we had to feed three children and three adults. Once a week I brought three-quarters of a barley loaf, which we ate immediately (the next day it turned bitter and crumbled like sawdust), a bit of disgusting marmalade, and from time to time a dozen-odd dekagrams of meat. I traded anything in the house for food. Coats, curtains, leather briefcases (people made shoes from them), paintings. For Babcia’s black coat with a sealskin collar I got close to one meter of wheat. That was a treasure. We ground this golden grain on quern stones hidden from the Germans. I made [zalewka], noodles from the flour, and to the bran I added grated red beets and baked flatcakes on the stove. The mother of our landlords, who was staying in the countryside with the pop’s son, found out about this wheat. She asked to borrow that wheat because she wanted to grind a larger amount, and that she would bring it right back from the village and return it to us. She took it, and that was the last we saw of her. That was inhuman, because the Ukrainians were the Germans’ favorites and had food in abundance. I exchanged, for example, beautiful curtains for 25 kg of millet groats. For an entire month, apart from that groats and 1 liter of milk a day, we ate nothing else. I received 30 liters of milk for two beautiful, hand-embroidered pictures of the Mother of God and the Lord Jesus. Tulu, returning from work, would surreptitiously get 2–3 sugar beets, from which I baked flatcakes with added bran, or boiled down “honey.” Another time I traded some garment for a little rye, which Tulu and I ground on the museum’s quern stones. For a time I took in two pupils, the pop’s children, as boarders [na stancji]. The payment was food: some potatoes, flour, and lard. It was paradise, but it didn’t last long, because the pop took his children away from the Poles. Mr Niedźwiecki lived with us for a while; he had family in a village and thus had his own food, he paid us something for the lodging, but I pilfered “a little something” from him. I remember once, starving, I ate a piece of sausage, but I fell terribly ill—“stolen goods don’t fatten.” That Mr Niedźwiecki was a great patriot; he went to Warsaw, took part in the Uprising, and apparently was killed. I write “went” but these were escapes at the risk of one’s life. Tulu brought caustic soda from the Museum, and we made soap. Soap was made not only from tallow, which was very hard to come by, but also from eggs, from hens, from carrion, with the addition of peas for better foaming. I went around the villages with this “commodity” and traded it for whatever I could, and it was already dangerous—the Ukrainians were preparing to murder Poles. Tulu got from the Museum a small bucket of salt (I don’t know how that salt ended up there). The director at the time was a Ukrainian; he could have given us more but preferred to give to his own, some even got a meter of salt [possibly a large measure]. Salt was also scarce under the German occupation. That salt helped us a bit too. I remember that once I traded 1 glass of salt for a hen. Unfortunately, the hen either fell ill with us or the woman had given us a sick one. I couldn’t come to terms with the loss of the hen. I doused it with water to bring it round and poured sour milk into its beak, and I cured the hen. Formerly, my Ukrainian neighbor would kill poultry for me; now she didn’t want to do that for a Polish woman. Tulu accomplished that deed. He took the hen and on a chopping block cut off its head, but he came out of the shed so pale that I never again turned to him in such a matter. And we also had to share this food with a Jewish woman. The Germans, or rather the Ukrainian militia, drove Jews from the ghetto to work. On the way one Jewish woman would drop in to us asking for food. I always gave her something, whether a few potatoes or a handful of some groats. Once I literally had nothing at home, and as proof I showed her the peelings from the last potatoes. The peelings were wafer-thin (as we say where we live, you could see [Kraków] through them), I gave them to the Jewish woman at her request. In general potatoes were a delicacy. Mostly I cooked them in their skins. Once I had only a few, too few to eat them on their own. So I made pierogi from them, and since I had only rye flour, I kneaded the dough from that; I “dressed” the pierogi with onion browned in a little cream. The children were very pleased; Lila even wrote about it in her little diary (it vanished somewhere, which is a great pity). Once we got from a museum co-worker some poor plums (it was Obolończyk—he is now a doctor in Kijów). I also kneaded dough from wholemeal flour and made “knedle,” I poured saccharin dissolved in water over them. Otuś called from the balcony or from the window to his peer Dzidka Targońska that we were having knedle for lunch. Tulu got a bit of food by riding his bicycle to Chodak to Hela. He brought cabbage from her, a little groats. The rides were dangerous because the Ukrainians were already well and truly preparing to go after the Poles. Tulu took roundabout routes and skirted villages. Once he took his winter coat to a peasant to trade. He got a goose and a bit of honey for it; there was a feast for several days. Sometimes one of the Unolds would come to us—(Jan from Szumska or Apolinary from Chodak). They almost always brought meat from a clandestine slaughter to sell. I distributed it among acquaintances. It was a very dangerous operation for those times. For such things the Germans even punished with death. I kept scraps for ourselves, for which I also paid them. In general we could have not suffered hunger because they (the Unolds) lived in the countryside and had it in abundance. But the sated don’t believe the hungry, and they were killed. Our drinks were tea made from toasted apple peels, from linden blossom or strawberry leaves. I think the one from strawberry leaves was the best. I also tried to make acorn coffee from toasted halves, but it was Sisyphean work because I could never grind them, nor even crush them in a mortar. I’ve gone on at such length about this hunger, but it was an enormous problem that, in fact, rested on me.