Aunt Nusia did what she could to get food and nursed her sick husband. We were healthy, but each day was very hard to get through. I bartered leftover rags for food, I went to dig potatoes, Tulu went to the forest for fuel. Digging was hard work for me. The peasants gathered and took turns doing the digging. Compared to me they were well-fed and strong, and I wanted to acquit myself with honor and kept up with them as best I could. For a day’s work I got two meals and a basket of potatoes. The women saw it was hard for me, and later they left me in the kitchen, where I cooked a hearty supper for an average of 15–20 people. Our landlady and her sons were lousy with lice, and lice didn’t pass us by either. The village was relatively wealthy, and despite requisition quotas people were not starving. Lila started going to school in Turza. When the teacher asked the children what each had eaten for breakfast—Lila said “dziamę,” because that’s what the mixture [feed mix] was called there. All the children laughed at Lila. We had no help from anywhere. I felt I wouldn’t last long in Turza. One day I went to Sącz on a reconnaissance. I rode a freight train in the guard’s booth with a railwayman, and again there were amorous advances, which I barely wriggled out of. It was the first time in about 10–12 years that I came to Sącz. I cried and laughed by turns as I walked the streets. I went to our “street.” “Our” house stood. I walked into strangers in “our” apartment. It was like a Fata Morgana in the desert. An elusive mirage. Then I went to Zawadę near N. Sącza, where to this day relatives of my Father live: the Zarębas and the Kumors told us they would take us in. I don’t remember how I got from N. Sącz to Gorlice, from where I walked to Turza (about 10 km). After arriving in Turza I went to the sołtys to ask for a cart. He didn’t give one. He explained that if we didn’t leave they would have to support us, because we had nothing left, and we probably wouldn’t die of hunger and cold. He didn’t give one, and yet most peasants—and Turza is a large village—had horses. The sołtys magnanimously advised us to go along with the Germans who would come here for hay. We had no other way out, and at the appointed time we pulled up in our landlady’s cart (the cart was pulled by cows) to the sołtys’s house. We were there around 11 and left after dark. At the sołtys’s the smell of frying scrambled eggs wafted, there was bread and milk on the table, and we set out with only dry bread. The Germans loaded two carts with hay “up to the ceiling.” On the bottom of one they put our belongings (a kilim, a bit of bedding, photographs, documents, and remnants of clothing). On the [second] we barely “wystyrmali” ourselves [managed to perch] and, swaying, set off on our way. The Germans, probably by order, sang the Polish anthem almost the whole way, naturally mangling it badly—they were losing, and so they were becoming “Polish patriots.” We arrived in Gorlice around midnight. The Germans unloaded the hay elsewhere, and our “estate” stayed there too. We stayed with the Germans in quarters. They treated us to hot coffee and bread. In the morning we started looking for a means of transport to Sącz. The railway was out, because we didn’t get a pass. We stood on the road a long time until one German agreed to go for the children and our things and take us to N. Sącz. We had remnants of vodka and bacon and promised them to the driver. We arrived in Sącz—got out at the market—the German looked at us and didn’t take payment. I went to Mrs Doroszukowa at 3 Różana Street. Unfortunately she wasn’t at home; the children, locked in, were looking out through the window onto the balcony. While waiting for Mrs Doroszukowa we went down to a shoemaker who had his workshop on the ground floor. Exhausted to the limit, I told him a few bitter truths about certain Poles. That great patriot took offense and didn’t even offer us water. Mrs Doroszukowa arrived, fed us “with what the house could provide,” and she herself was in poverty. We slept one night, and in the morning I went to Zawada, from where I came back with a cart and took the family to the relatives.