We first lived with the Kumors. They were a childless couple. They were raising Mietek Fręczek, whose mother—the sister of Kumorowa—died when Mietek was still a little boy. Kumorowa is a Zarębianka by birth—the daughter of my father’s sister. Kumor is an old, conceited man. He treated us like intruders—who disturbed his peace. They had three rooms; they gave us the smallest little room right by the kitchen, without a stove. At first we ate together; the fare was very simple, but that was nothing—we liked everything. Worse was that Kumor wanted to get rid of us. On the opposite side of the road lived Józef and Maria Zaręba. Józef too is the son of my father’s sister. They had as many as 9 children. They were relatively well-off because they had 25 morgs of land and a piece of forest, but they had been terribly depleted by the war. They were, however, much more warmhearted, unlike Kumor, who moreover was the wójt and could really have helped us. The Zarębas whitewashed a room for us, lent us two beds, a trestle table, a bench, and two folding chairs, and once again we had our own “home.” I tried to obtain food as much as possible on my own—Kumor looked down on us. He did not believe that Tulu had been a professor at the Krzemieniec Lyceum, and I a teacher. Once I baked cookies with saccharin, made tea, and invited Kumor. On that occasion I showed him our diplomas; the youngest, five-year-old Ania, gave him a reading of a newspaper [i.e., demonstrated reading], and we rather impressed Mr wójt. He arranged a larger flour ration for us, and wooden clogs for Tulu. Kumorowa gave us 1 liter of splendid milk (for 5 people). I went to the cellars for potatoes as if they were my own. Christmas was wonderful because there was ample bread, there was even a roll, and a bit of meat in the form of a chicken earned by me. The Christmas tree was decorated with cubes of sugar in little paper wrappings. I was at the name day of yet another Zarębianka, Ludmiła; that too was a childless marriage, also “oak-like” [‘zdebowate’—stiff, formal], but at her place I ate my fill of sausage and cake and got tipsy on samogon. To repay the Zarębas, the kindest of all these relatives, I taught two of their children, Hanka and Józek, to read and write (now Hanka has finished vocational training in dressmaking, married, has a beautiful house and 3 children. Józek is preparing for his master’s exam in part-time studies). Along with teaching the Zarębas, two children of the neighbors also came to the lessons, and Ania was learning too. All this lasted not quite 3 months, because in January 1945 (exactly on January 20). Just a few days earlier some German unit had arrived at Zawada and carried over to the Kumors a whole slaughtered piglet. They didn’t manage to eat it; they had to flee. Kumorowa called me to “dress” it. It was the first time in my life I dealt with such a job. I took Tulu’s razor and shaved the piglet with it, and then they helped me split it. I got a whole half from the Kumors. I gave a quarter to the Zarębas, and a quarter remained for us. It was a splendid feast. Night came, the bullets again whistled across the yard like swallows. I had to go to the well for water, and literally right by my ear a bullet whizzed past. We piled into the cellar with the Zarębas, but we sat it out there only one night. I couldn’t sit still and kept going out of the cellar and watching the fighting. Zawada is on the hilltop. Below, N. Sącz [Nowy Sącz]; the sky was dark navy, densely lit by shells. One terrible nightmare—the Germans—left. In the morning Bolshevik units entered Zawada. At the Zarębas’ and the Kumors’ there were swarms of them. They literally stole things out of people’s hands and raped women. Because I spoke Ukrainian I often had to intervene in various matters at the neighbors’. At the Kumors’ the captain himself took up quarters, which made Kumor immensely proud. He was given the best room, in which there was a chest of drawers, and in it, locked in a drawer, two gold wedding rings, a gold chain, and a large gold pocket watch. The “gentleman” captain had to go on toward Berlin, but before that he pried up the top of the chest and took all the gold “as a keepsake.” There was an innumerable number of such various thefts. During the hostilities the beautiful Sącz castle was blown up. The castle was blown up on orders of the Bolshevik troops, quite needlessly. In my youth various celebrations were held in the castle courtyard. In the halls they held exhibitions of paintings by such painters as Reguła, or the excellent portraitist Barbacki (he was killed by the Germans as a hostage). In the little woods surrounding the castle I gathered honey mushrooms and russulas. The Germans blew up the bridge over the Dunajec. The end of the bridge where I had walked with my dad as a child and later with girlfriends, and with Tulu as my fiancé. I saw from the bank how the Soviets were laying a pontoon bridge. The winter was mild, the water high and turbid. A soldier fell in before my eyes and drowned, and no one tried to save him. In a short time they “patched” and pieced together the old bridge, and in that state it had to serve people for several more years. After it was dismantled its parts were taken to Opole, and there it continues to serve people. For us very normal times had already arrived. Tulu began teaching already in January. He walked on foot from Zawada in wooden clogs; often his entire day’s food was a plate of “dziama” [a mush/porridge] with milk. Instruction took place in various houses all over the city; there were also classes in the tenement where before the war we had lived. Lila began to attend the 6th grade in Zawada, and Otuś the 2nd; Otuś had a nice navy-blue outfit (reworked from Tulu’s), and so I dressed him, to protect the clothes, in a “cobbler’s” smock, until Otuś rebelled and no longer wanted to go to school in a smock. In the spring the children spent whole days tearing around outdoors. Once Otuś and Ania fell into the manure pit. In Zawada too Ania and Otuś came down with whooping cough; Ania in particular went through it badly. I began to look for an apartment in the city. It was tremendously difficult. Marysia Korpińska (an old friend of ours from the same street) advised me that at Helena Chełmiecka 3 there was a post-Jewish little house in which people from Poznań were living, and they were returning to their parts. I went to the Housing Office and they assigned it to us. Unfortunately in the meantime Mrs Sekułowa quickly moved into it with her three sons and did not want to budge. I asked at the town hall to be assigned some other apartment, but they said they would bring charges against that lady and she would have to move out. The case went to court and Mrs Sekułowa received an order to move out. (She had a sister on the same street, Mrs Cieślowa, and she had an apartment with her), but that didn’t help, and Tulu walked kilometers every day from Zawada. I hit on a “brilliant” idea, loaded our belongings onto a cart, and we moved into half the little house through the window (the house had three little rooms and a kitchen). Only then did Mrs Sekułowa move to her sister’s apartment, and later to a beautiful apartment in the commune.