At the “farm” we left Maria Unoldowa. She too fled soon after us, and the farm was taken over by Gena Majkowa. What happened to the furniture—I don’t know, and there was quite a lot of it, because three rooms were furnished. We loaded part of the bedding, dishes, and books into crates and trunks and left them with neighbors “for safekeeping.” We had to flee—around Krzemieniec the Ukrainian blackness [mob]. In Krzemieniec, Germans raging. Tulu’s Polish co-workers were being picked over like peas [hunted down one by one] by the Germans. Any day Tulu might not return home from the museum. The children had long been asking me for a kitten. Downstairs in the basement lived a woman. Her cat had lovely kittens. I got one—beautiful gray. We named him Szaruś. The children didn’t want to leave the kitten in Krzemieniec and took him with them. Everyone later talked about the cat fleeing with us. Before that we collected information, addresses needed during the escape. We had very little cash, because the Ukrainians didn’t want to buy, knowing we wouldn’t take our belongings with us anyway; besides, those hyenas had plenty after the Jews. We took with us the remnants of clothes, some bedding. Tulu took a lot of his gear, like a microscope, some special mirror, tweezers, and so on. Now Tulu says he took it unnecessarily, but then it was hard for him to part with it. The most important things were the documents and photographs. I took the kettle my mother bought me when I went to my position, and which still serves us to this day. We hired a cart and loaded our “property.” The children also got on it with the kitten and a toy monkey; we with Tulu went on foot into the unknown, terrifying. We did not receive permission to leave, but at the railway station we got on the train as “fare-dodgers.” In the same compartment sat some Germans, but they pretended not to see us. That’s how we got to Dubno. We hauled out our bundles and set up camp in the waiting room. Supposedly some railwayman there was to place us in a train bound for Brody, where Tulu’s brother—Aldek, working on the railway at that time—was waiting for us, but here one train after another kept leaving and we sat at the station. Tulu fainted. When I revived him, we put our heads together and Tulu went to the railwaymen and showed them a gold five-ruble coin—it helped. They shoved us into a train, but what of it when in Radziwiłłów they told us to get off. It was the border station between the so-called Ukraine and the General Government. The next station was already Brody, and in it Aldek. The station was empty and we alone with a mountain of bundles and the children in the middle. A Polish railwayman came up to us and advised us to leave the platform quickly, because when the shift came—and those were Ukrainians—we’d be done for. We dragged the bundles and the children as best we could to the nearest house. We were lucky, because it was the house of a Polish railwayman. He installed us in a room from which that same day they had carried the body to the cemetery of that railwayman’s son, murdered by Ukrainians. Well into the afternoon a railwayman from Brody appeared and took Lila and Otuś into a freight train to a trackman’s hut. He locked them in, and I was terribly afraid of that separation. The children arrived safely; Aldek took them, who supposedly cried when he saw them. We stayed alone with Ania in Radziwiłłów because our hosts weren’t there. Suddenly toward evening we heard shooting, very close. We lay down on the floor under the windows and waited. Suddenly someone began banging at the windows; we were terribly frightened because we thought they were bandits, until we heard a voice: Mr Duda—please open up. That young, tall railwayman had come especially for us. He scooped Ania up in his arms, and we only the suitcase with documents and photographs, and we ran after him to the locomotive waiting for us. On the tracks a German stopped us for a moment, but that railwayman answered briskly that he was saving us from bandits, and thus we reached the engine. They had come deliberately for us; reportedly that railwayman ferried many families to the General Government for evacuation and himself was killed. We got off at night before the station and went to the agreed house to sleep. In the morning we went to Aldek’s, where Lila and Otuś were already waiting for us. Seemingly safe yet poor, homeless, helpless. All our belongings stayed in Radziwiłłów, and only later that railwayman, moving to Brody, transported our “treasures” as well. We obtained, for a fee, “fake” Kennkarten (equivalents of an identity card), and we waited for Nusia, who was to come for us from Zmigrod. When Nusia saw us, she was disappointed, because she thought that after all the professor’s family would arrive, and here we were with Tulu—skinny, blackened, dressed “Lord have mercy,” and three wretched children. We walked for the last time in the garden at old Brody, we slept under Tulu’s family roof. In that little house Otuś had been christened during vacation. To that little house I used to come in my maiden days and later as a married woman; in that little house Lila stayed for a time under Babcia’s care. In that little house Ania was for the first and last time. We ate fruit from the trees that Tulu had planted. The little house was charming. It had a little porch overgrown with vines, a vestibule from which one entered a room and a little kitchen on the right, and on the left there were two little rooms, those cubbyholes separated by a thin wall not reaching the ceiling. Wooden floors, clean and yellow, white walls. In the garden lilacs, acacias, ashes, fruit trees, and lots of flowers. We had to say goodbye to the Aldeks (they had three sons then), to the little house, and go on—to Zmigrod near Jasło. The journey was awful. In Lwów, in Podzamcze, we waited a long time, and the stench of burned bodies reached the train. In the train an incredible crush; the children stood the whole time on the benches behind people’s backs. In their arms they held the kitten, who struggled to get away. With difficulty we reached Jasło, and from there by some truck to Zmigrod. Auntie’s little flat was clean, cozy, peaceful, but unfortunately Julek—Nusia’s husband—was already sick with tuberculosis then. Tuberculosis had already taken over his whole organism; he could no longer walk because his legs were ill too. Staying with Nusia then was Julek’s sister, Zosia Mrożkowa—the mother of the later famous writer Mrożek. I remember that for supper there were knedle ziemniaczane. I don’t remember after how many days; I think already the next day we moved to “our own.” It was a single room in a post-Jewish house. Besides us there were two more families living there, the Przewłockis and the Brożynas. They had two-room flats. Mrs Przewłocka came from Zmigrod and they even had a bit of their own field. The Przewłockis were refugees. Mrs Przewłocka worked at the dairy. Przewłocki wrote poems. The Brożynas had a little daughter, Halinka, and the Przewłockis had a little ward, Janeczka, sickly and very inappropriately dressed and raised; when the front came through, that child died. Tulu also worked at the dairy, and then it was a food paradise. There was plenty of milk; we got cream and butter, there was bread and even meat. Nusia gave us some fabrics from which I sewed coats for Ania and Lila; I even outfitted Otuś and Kazik Unold (he was with us too) from old clothes. I also sewed myself as many as two dresses. In a word, a paradise compared to Krzemieniec. I remember my first trip to the seamstress, who lived outside Zmigrod. I had to force myself to take that walk, because in Krzemieniec it had been impossible due to the Ukrainian bands. Right before our flight from Krzemieniec we slept with axes under the beds in order to defend ourselves in case of an attack. Not far from us they had already murdered our acquaintance Górecki. Our “furniture” in Zmigrod was mostly from sawmill offcuts, nailed together by Tulu. There were two “daybeds” and a cupboard of boards, and Nusia lent us 1 iron bed, a table, a small cabinet, and a few chairs. It was not much larger, or maybe the same, as our present room. One daybed was carried out into the vestibule during the day. Kazik U. slept on it. He was supposed to be at Nusia’s, but I took him to us because the sick Jurek needed peace, and Kazek was terribly talkative; secondly, I didn’t want the starved, emaciated boy to be in contact with a consumptive. On the shelves, as always where Tulu is, there were already stacks of newspapers. We lit a lamp. In the evenings we sat at the table; the cat strolled under our chins or along our shoulders. I, as usual, didn’t idle; I often cooked dinners at Nusia’s, helped her wash and clean; at our place there was also the need to scrub the floor, cook, etc. I taught Bogna and Otuś, and Lila even had a few piano lessons and went to school. I also traveled to Jasło with butter for the Germans; on that occasion I always carried something to trade, most often veal, cream, butter (that was Nusia’s merchandise), but also enough for us that for that merchandise the dentist repaired my and Lila’s teeth. These were dangerous trips, because often at the entry to Jasło the Germans searched us. For that purpose I took Lila and hid the goods under the seat; in the back there were crates of butter for the warehouse. Nusia always awaited our return with fear. Tulu often took the children for walks—they collected ćereń [cornelian cherry], from which I made excellent syrup. Otuś fell ill again with pneumonia, but as usual came out of it safely. The nightmare was Julek’s illness. Nusia, as they say, “stood on her head” to save him, but implacable tuberculosis was devouring him. He was a very handsome fellow, he was a teacher, but even before the war Father brought him into the dairy (it was their own). When the war broke out, Nusia and Julek took a post in Zmigrod, and Julek’s parents stayed in Bożęcin. Kazik U. was in Zmigrod until First Communion, and he was Lila’s peer. That idyll did not last long— from the east the front was approaching. The Germans were having fits of fury. Armia Krajowa (A-K) had its hands full. Almost the entire Żmigrod intelligentsia belonged to the AK. By day they worked, at night they went on actions, and now the Germans ordered trenches to be dug. I, on account of the small children, was exempt from this. Tulu, as a dairy employee, too. Some traitor betrayed the AK men. The Gestapo carried out a roundup on them. The front was already close—a “theater” was coming to Zmigrod; the “actresses” lodged in private homes. One of them lived at the Brożynas’, who belonged to the AK. Just in case, he cut out some earth under the floor to hide in the event of a search. The night was sultry; we slept with the window open. Suddenly I hear: “Das Fenster zumachen, aber schnell.” I closed the window, and the Gestapo were already pounding at the hallway door. Przewłocki opened for them, and the Germans straight to us. They shone flashlights, saw Tulu in bed and said, “Gut, gut, der Mann ist zu Hause,” and pulled out a list of the condemned. They asked for Tulu’s name, which however did not appear on their list. They did a search anyway and ordered Tulu to get dressed and took him to the Brożynas’. On hearing the rumpus at our place and in the hallway, Brożyna leapt into the little pit that was in the corner of the kitchen. In that spot stood a table covered with a cloth. The Germans slapped the “actress” across the face for not having watched over Brożyna—they were simply raging. They ordered Tulu and Przewłocki to shift a pile of coal in the cellar. They jabbed bayonets into every bundle of straw in the attic. Brożyna vanished, and the house had already been under observation since dusk. They took Tulu and Przewłocki and ordered them to lead them to the indicated addresses. Tulu knew who was meant, but luckily wriggled out of it, saying that he was a stranger, that he knew no one, and led them to a house that was not on the list. They beat Tulu and told him to go home; Tulu came drenched in sweat, because until the last moment he was sure they would kill him. My reaction was unceasing screaming. The Germans sprang at me and hushed me like a witch, and I certainly looked that way, because I was in a black slip and my hair was disheveled. The next day they told me that with that screaming I had alarmed the neighboring houses and the suspects fled. When they took Tulu I was already sure I would never see him again. The Germans took Brożyna’s wife and said that if her husband did not report by morning, they would kill her. Tulu and Przewłocki were gone—I was left alone with the children and little Halinka Brożynówna. The Germans ordered the light left on and burst into the house every moment together with the “actress.” Little Halinka had a cradle fastened to the floor—I had to sit by her and rock her. After some time I heard from the pit in the kitchen the voice of Brożyna, who asked me to hand over clothes, because he was only in his shirt. Brożyna’s clothes were lying in the kitchen, but I handed him another set from the wardrobe. Near dawn Tulu came—enormous relief. I told him about Brożyna. In the morning the wailing family rushed in and took Halinka, but I told them nothing about Brożyna. Only when the guard left from under the house did I pass him breakfast under the table and some cigarettes, and Brożyna escaped through the gardens to the forest. Brożyna’s wife and several other hostages were assigned to the front to kitchens—after some time they began to pester the soldiers, and they all returned home. Then came the attempt on Hitler. German troops were marching through Zmigród—I stood in the doorway, and the soldiers waved their hands to me and shouted, “Matka! das Krüg ist cu ende.” Unfortunately for us, that was only when the “Krüg” [Krieg] began. During this roundup they took several people from Zmigrod and shot them. The front was approaching—when the houses began to shake from the explosions, then we did the biggest foolish thing with Nusia. We took the most valuable things, the sick Julek, and the children and went to Kąty (closer to the Dukla Pass), right on the Wisłoka, hoping the front would bypass us, and it was quite the opposite.