A black cow, in burgundy spots,
It was chewing grass, twisting its muzzle.
Damn it, where did so many “j”s come from here.
The Żmigród period was a separate stage for the whole family. I tried to send Ania to the nuns (in Żmigród) who ran something like a kindergarten. I would give her a bottle of milk, a slice of bread with butter (in Żmigród Tulu worked in a dairy run by Nusia), but Ania didn’t want to play with the other children and stopped going. The children played best together as a foursome: Ania, Otuś, Bogna, and Kazek Unold (I took him to stay with us from Hela, who at that time was teaching in Lezach near Borzęcina). Lila did not take part in those games. Sometimes the children went wild, and Ania led the way, and in those games she always showed the greatest courage. I remember when Mrs Kruczkowska came to us (she too had fled from Krzemieniec and was living near Jasło). Nusia, I, and Mrs Kruczkowska couldn’t talk ourselves out with each other—the younger children were playing, and Lila disappeared; after a while I found her behind a curtain in a corner (that storage nook served us as a clothes closet), she was sitting hunched up and crying... because she couldn’t stand the bustle and the loud talking. Our children were a bit strange. I have to go back to Otuś, who fell ill with pneumonia again. Aunt Nusia had gone off somewhere; I cooked dinners at her place for two households and took care of Julek, Nusia’s husband, who had tuberculosis. It was very hard for me to look after a bunch of children and two sick people. There was a doctor we knew, Dr. Rezacz (he was murdered by the Gestapo because he treated wounded “Akowców” [Home Army]), and he prescribed and gave us prontosil and only aspirin. It seems that it was the aspirin and the cupping that helped the most. I must still write about the further “education” of the children, especially Ania. When fate tossed us as far as Zawada near N. Sącz, we settled there with our relatives, the Zarębas. Wanting to repay them, I undertook to teach two of their children, Józka and Hania, to read and write. Besides that, I took on two more neighbors’ children for lessons. Ania steadfastly kept pace with me in those lessons, although I wasn’t really teaching her, because she was not yet fully five then, and those other children were already seven. I did have to buy her notebooks, and Otuś and Lila “assigned” her [assignments]. In a short time Ania was already reading newspapers, while those other children were still spelling things out from the primer.
Again I return to the Krzemieniec times, to my broken arm. It would have been a trifle in normal times, but in wartime it is a small tragedy. I had obtained for a piece of soap 2 liters of buckwheat, but unmilled. It was early spring when I went with it to the hand-mill at some people we knew. I ground the buckwheat; a woman I knew sifted out the husks for me and on top of that let me have 2 liters of milk. Overjoyed, I hurried back so as to get home before dark, and a stretch of the way led through the forest. I was walking downhill and went nose-first onto the ground, which was covered with ice. I braced myself with my hand and it “snapped.” I got down to the main road, but I didn’t stop in at home; instead I passed the backpack with the milk and flour to the children and sent for Tulu, who was giving lessons to students doing the high-school classes. Tulu took me to the hospital. My arm had swollen, and at the hospital they wanted to cut the sleeve of my fur coat—the only warm outer garment I had. I didn’t allow it—they managed with difficulty to take off that fur coat, and the arm was set under anesthesia. The fracture was complicated and displaced, but it knit well, and to this day I don’t feel any pains in that arm. I wore my arm in a cast for six weeks, and that was a nightmare, because I couldn’t comb the children’s hair or my own, and I also wore two braids over my ears that I tucked under; that was my hairstyle. Tulu did our hair, but very clumsily. Babcia was no longer alive then.
Christmas trees