We first moved in with the Kumors. It was a childless marriage. They were raising Mietek Fręczek, whose mother—the sister of Kumorowa—died when Mietek was still a small boy. Kumorowa was a Zarębianka by birth—the daughter of my father’s sister. Kumor was an old, conceited man. He treated us like intruders—who were disturbing his peace. They had three rooms; they gave us the smallest little room right next to the kitchen, without a stove. At first we ate together; the fare was very simple, but that was nothing—we liked everything. Worse was that Kumor wanted to get rid of us. On the opposite side of the road lived Józef and Maria Zaręba. Józef too was a son of my Father’s sister. They had as many as 9 children. They were relatively well-off because they had 25 morgs of land and a piece of forest, but they had been terribly worn down by the war. Yet they were much warmer than Kumor, who moreover was the wójt and could really have helped us. The Zarębas whitewashed a room for us, lent us two beds, a trestle table, a bench, and two folding chairs, and again we had our own “home.” I tried to procure food as much as possible on my own—Kumor looked down on us. He didn’t believe that Tulu had been a professor at the Krzemieniec Lyceum, and I a teacher. Once I baked cookies with saccharin, made tea, and invited Kumor. On that occasion I showed him our diplomas, the youngest, five-year-old Ania, demonstrated reading the newspaper to him, and we managed to impress Mr wójt a bit. He arranged for a larger flour allotment for us and wooden clogs for Tulu. Kumorowa gave us 1 liter of wonderful milk (for 5 people). I went down to the cellars for potatoes as if to my own. Christmas was wonderful because there was enough bread, there was even a roll, a bit of meat in the form of a hen I earned, and a tree decorated with sugar cubes in tissue paper. I went to the name day of another Zarębianka, Ludmiła; that too was a childless marriage, also “zdebowate” [wooden/stiff], but I ate my fill there of sausage and cake and got tipsy on samogon [moonshine]. To repay the Zarębas, the kindest of all those relatives, I taught two of their children, Hanka and Józek, to read and write (at present Hanka has finished a vocational tailoring school, married, has a beautiful house and 3 children. Józek is preparing for his master’s exam in extramural studies). Along with teaching the Zarębas, two children of neighbors also came to lessons, and Ania learned too. All this lasted not quite 3 months, because in January 1945 (exactly January 20). Just a few days earlier some German detachment had come to Zawada and carried to the Kumors a whole slaughtered piglet. They didn’t manage to eat it; they had to flee. Kumorowa called me to “dress” it. For the first time in my life I undertook such a job. I took Tulu’s razor and shaved the piglet with it, and then they helped me split it. I got a whole half from the Kumors. I gave a quarter to the Zarębas and a quarter remained for us. It was a splendid feast. Night came, again bullets across the yard whistled like swallows. I had to go to the well for water; a bullet literally flew past my ear. We piled into the cellar with the Zarębas, but we sat there only one night. I couldn’t sit still and kept going out of the cellar and watching the fighting. Zawada up on the hill. Below, N. Sącz; the sky was dark navy, lit densely by shells. One terrible nightmare—the Germans—were gone. In the morning Bolshevik units entered Zawada. There were swarms of them at the Zarębas’ and the Kumors’. They stole literally out of people’s hands, they raped women. Since I knew the Ukrainian language, I often had to intervene in various matters at the neighbors’. At the Kumors’ the captain himself moved in, which made Kumor immensely proud. They gave up the best room to him, in which there was a chest of drawers, and in it two gold wedding rings, a gold chain, and a large gold pocket watch locked in a drawer. The “gentleman” captain had to go on toward Berlin, but before that he pried up the top of the chest and took “as a keepsake” all the gold. There were countless such thefts. During the fighting the beautiful Sącz castle was blown up. The castle was blown up on the orders of the Bolshevik troops, entirely needlessly. In my youth various ceremonies were held in the castle courtyard. In the rooms they held exhibitions of paintings by such painters as Reguły, or the excellent portraitist Barbacki (he died at German hands as a hostage). In the little wood surrounding the castle I gathered podpieńki and gołąbki [honey fungus and russulas]. The Germans blew up the bridge over the Dunajec. The end of the bridge along which I had walked with my dad as a child, and later with girlfriends, and with Tulu as my fiancé. I watched from the bank as the Soviets laid a pontoon bridge. The winter was mild, the water high and turbid. A soldier, before my eyes, fell in and drowned, and no one tried to save him. In a short time they “patched” and cobbled together the old bridge, and in that state it had to serve people for a few more years. After it was dismantled, they took the parts to Opole, and there it continues to serve people. Very normal times began for us. Already in January Tulu started teaching. He walked from Zawada on foot, in wooden clogs; often his entire day’s food was a plate of “dziama” with milk [mash/porridge]. Classes were held in various houses all over town; there were also classrooms in the tenement where we had lived before the war. Lila started going in Zawada to the 6th grade, and Otuś to the 2nd. Otuś had a nice navy suit (altered from Tulu’s), and for the protection of the clothes I dressed him in a “szewski” apron [cobbler’s apron], until Otuś rebelled and didn’t want to wear the apron to school anymore. In the spring the children ran around outdoors all day. Once Otuś and Ania fell into the manure slurry. In Zawada, too, Ania and Otuś came down with whooping cough; Ania in particular had a hard time with it. I began to look for an apartment in town. It was extremely difficult. Marysia Korpińska (an old friend of ours from the same street) advised me that in Helena, at Chełmiecka 3, there was a post-Jewish little house where people from Poznań were living, and who were returning to their own parts. I went to the Housing Office and they assigned it to us. Unfortunately, in the meantime Mrs Sekułowa quickly moved into it with her three sons and wouldn’t budge. I asked at the magistrate’s to be assigned some other apartment, but they said they would file a complaint against that lady and she would have to move out. The matter went to court and Mrs Sekułowa received an eviction order. (She had a sister on the same street, Mrs Cieślowa, and at her place she had an apartment) but that didn’t help, and Tulu was walking kilometers from Zawada every day. I had a “brilliant” idea: I loaded our belongings onto a cart and we moved into half the little house through the window (the house had three little rooms and a kitchen). Only then did Mrs Sekułowa move into her sister’s apartment, and later to a fine apartment in the gmina.