Aunt Nusia did what she could to get food and nursed her sick husband. We were healthy, but each day was very hard to get through. I bartered the last rags for food, I went to dig potatoes, Tulu went to the forest for firewood. The digging was hard work for me. The peasants gathered and took turns organizing the potato harvest. They were well-fed and strong compared to me, and I wanted to hold my head high and kept up with them as best I could. For a day’s work I got two meals and a basket of potatoes. The women saw it was hard for me and then would leave me in the kitchen, where I cooked a hearty supper for on average 15–20 people. Our landlady and her sons were lice-ridden, and lice didn’t spare us either. The village was relatively well-off, and despite the requisitions people did not go hungry. Lila started going to school in Turza. When the teacher asked the children what each had eaten for breakfast—Lila said “dziama,” because that’s what the mixture was called there. All the children laughed at Lila. We had no help from anywhere. I felt I wouldn’t last long in Turza. One day I went to Sącz to reconnoiter. I rode a freight train in the booth with a railwayman, and again there were amorous advances, which I barely wriggled out of. It was probably after some 10–12 years that I came to Sącz again. I cried and laughed by turns as I walked the streets. I went to our “street.” “Our” house was standing. I walked in to strangers in “our” apartment. It was something like a “Fata Morgana” in the desert. An elusive mirage. Then I went to Zawada near N. Sącz, where to this day relatives of my Father live: the Zarębas and the Kumors; they told us they would take us in. I don’t remember how I got from N. Sącz to Gorlice, from where I walked to Turza (about 10 km). When I got to Turza I went to the sołtys to ask for a wagon. He wouldn’t give one. He explained that if we didn’t leave they would have to support us, because we had nothing left, and we probably wouldn’t die of hunger and cold. He still wouldn’t, and yet most peasants—and Turza is a big village—had horses. The sołtys magnanimously advised us to go along with the Germans who would come here for hay. We had no other way out, and at the appointed time we pulled up with our landlady’s wagon (the wagon was pulled by cows) to the sołtys’s house. We were there around 11, and we left after dark. At the sołtys’s there was the smell of scrambled eggs frying, there was bread and milk on the table, and we set off on dry bread. The Germans loaded two wagons with hay “up to the ceiling.” At the bottom of one they put our things (a kilim, a bit of bedding, photographs, documents, and the remnants of clothes). On the [other] we barely “wystyrmali” ourselves [managed to perch], and, lurching, set off on the road. The Germans, probably by order, sang the Polish anthem almost the whole way, naturally mangling it badly—they were losing and therefore were becoming “Polish patriots.” We arrived around midnight in Gorlice. The Germans unloaded the hay elsewhere, and our “property” remained there too. We stayed with the Germans at quarters. They treated us to hot coffee and bread. In the morning we started looking around for a means of transport to Sącz. The railway was out because we didn’t get a pass. We stood a long time on the road until one German agreed to go for the children and our things and take us to N. Sącz. We had remnants of vodka and bacon and promised them to the driver. We arrived in Sącz—we got out at the market—the German looked at us and didn’t take payment. I went to Mrs Doroszukowa on Różana Street No. 3. Unfortunately she wasn’t home; the children, locked in, were looking out the window onto the balcony. While waiting for Mrs Doroszukowa we went down to the cobbler who had his workshop on the ground floor. Exhausted to the last limits, I told him a few bitter words of truth about some Poles. This great patriot took offense and didn’t offer us even water. Mrs Doroszukowa arrived, fed us with “czem chata bogata” [whatever the house could afford], and she was living in poverty. We spent one night, and in the morning I went to Zawada, from where I came back with a wagon and took the family to the relatives.