Board of Education of the School District
of Kraków in Kraków.
On May 29, 1972, I received from the Department of Education in N. Sącz a letter notifying me that I was being retired.
Hereby I lodge an appeal from this decision for the following reasons:
I started copying out this petition and gave up. Forget it! They dismissed me, period. Just one more thing on this subject. As I fought like a lion against going into retirement, one of the teachers told me: "It's hard, age comes and one has to go. As soon as railwaymen hit 60 they must absolutely leave." I was outraged by such a comparison and said that when a writer hits 60 he's not allowed to write, a poet to create, a painter to paint.
I at least won this much, that despite a relatively short period—only 21 years of work—I received a pension not much smaller than Tula’s. Tula has 2,420 zł – I 2,379 zł. Perhaps now I'll still manage to devote time not so much to the children as at least to the grandchildren! The children and I! Lila was 6 years old, Otuś barely 2 when the war began. Ania was born at the beginning of the war, Iwonka a short time after the war, and my whole effort was aimed primarily not at upbringing but at keeping the children alive. When the situation finally began to improve, basically the children had already grown up and started leaving home one after the other. I had no time to raise them in an organized, considered way; besides, the children seemed to me such a part of me, simply my whole, that I often caught myself as if they had been with me since my earliest years, that they feel and think the way I do. My father inscribed in such a book of mine—a memory album—for example: "God gives to those who rise early," "With truthfulness you will get through the world," "Love of the Fatherland and honor are the most important good," and the like. I read Rodziewiczówna, Kraszewski, Sienkiewicz, Mickiewicz, Słowacki, Konopnicka. The ideals of those writers became my ideals. I was foolish and I am foolish, although so-called honest. I wrote many pieces set already after the war, but those are, well, consequences of the war.
I would still like to write a lot about the children, about their adolescent years, about their studies and their lives as adults. One thing that cannot be changed is that their worries, their lives, arouse in me a constant fear; they often rob me of sleep. Although many things make me happy, although I would like at least to embroider some pretty things, because in fact that's about all I know how to do (I can't play [music], I can't paint), in the end I would rather die in order to stop constantly fearing and worrying about the children.
[Erased, almost illegible lament about the children]